Thank you for this piece. Intersected with my own memories from about the same period when my late wife and I lived in Tianjin and I taught at Nankai University and she at a foreign languages middle school, first 1985-87, then 1990-91 w/ '88-89 summer back for shorter visits. Regular trips up to Beijing allowed us time to see many of the places you note. The area of  Ritan Park you describe was a favorite place. Even shortly after June 6, 1989 (I think in fact June 7-9) when we stayed at the Ritan Hotel briefly in the wake of the demonstrations and killings, the area brought a certain calmness that disappeared as we walked toward Jianguomen Wai DaJie. I appreciate your memories and sentiments. 
Between 2010 up until June of last year I visited China every year at least once and several times twice for up to three months at a time. Although I spent most of my time each trip in Hubei Province studying T'aiji at Wudangshan, each trip I arrived and departed from Beijing and chose to spend several days in the city. I always stayed in a hostel located in one or another hutongs on the west side. My favorite park was Yuetan where the Temple of the Moon is located. It's quite and very quiet - except most mornings between 10AM and noon a singer from the Beijing Opera performed with a small ensemble of Chinese musical instruments. It was fascinating, even enthralling. The entry cost was 10 Quai (about $1.65).<br/>As for the pollution there, it varied quite a bit. In early Autumn and Spring the sky was sometimes amazingly clear. At the end of November 2015 however the pollution was so thick that after we boarded our plane to leave for Seattle we were not cleared for takeoff for about twenty minutes.<br/>Beijing has riches, but it can be overwhelmingly bewildering due to its size and complexity. Two things make it less difficult than many other cities: 1. An excellent Metro system and 2. Perhaps the best airport in the world.
"Yet Beijing’s streets, walls, temples, gardens and alleys were part of a carefully woven tapestry that reflected the constellations above, geomantic forces below and an invisible overlay of holy mountains and gods. It was a total work of art, epitomizing the political-religious system that ran traditional China for millenniums. It was Chinese belief incarnate."<br/><br/>As so once was Lhasa and the rest of Tibet...
this is a romantic view of the city, one that sells an image, not reality.  I married into a Beijing family and got to see parts of the city that are desperate, dirty, depressing, out-dated by centuries, secrets, unsavory habits and full of every safety and fire code violation you can think of.  I really hate it when the government and public only  choose to glorify the pretty historical images  and not the reality of how human behavior is shaped and shaping the reality of day to day living.  
I work with Chinese in film and technology. They are so industrious and full of knowledge unlike Americans with whom I've worked. One won an Emmy. But the demand for them is so great they travel the world always ending up in Beijing. The emails and dropboxed films and schematics stop. No Facebook. No discussions of politics. Then after a year or three, they return to me in NYC. Emails, dropboxes, lots of working, lots of breathing air that is not grey. But never a discussion on China or politics. I have met their visiting parents, who always bring beautiful gifts in beautiful gift wrapping. We bow. We joke about Trump; they laugh. But these adult-children are again in demand. I have to fight for their talent and work ethics. As for Beijing, all they will say is, Can't see or breathe. They teach at universities when there and freelance for companies. One announced that she had married when home; her husband was in Beijing while she traveled incessantly. Another, the sweetest, most beautiful young woman, had also been bequeathed by her parents. Yet we were in love. She walked fifteen feet behind me then would rush up to open doors for me. She eventually left to marry so no emails, no communication. A comparison is New Delhi; the best tech workers, home blackened, marriages arranged. But no communication because the Internet backbone was minimal. Now Trump wants these people out; no green cards. So we marry by choice and divorce.
The Chinese government provides public places where people can worship while America does everything it can to remove worship on public property.
Good to see Beijing mentioned  is some other context that high pollution count, it is an incredibly cosmopolitan city.<br/>Interesting to see Ian Johnson search for religion around former temples, the Chinese do have some form of religion but it is occasional, burning incenses before the family altar very common, the expectant mother at the temple asking prayers from a monk, or back again for an ill baby, and always with death, as family and friends knell in turn and pray before a picture of the entombed, while drums and gongs are played near by. The religion is internalized and likely never disappeared even in the days of the Chairman. It does not require a lot of apparatus. 
What baloney!  Beijing would be one of the largest cesspools in the world, except it's turning into a polluted desert even faster than it has become a cesspool.  Even the sewage and filth is drying up under the relentless onslaught of drought and encroaching desertification.  You can ignore the realities, but people who read regular reports on what is happening to the environment and climate worldwide know exactly what is happening in Beijing.  Your city will look like that 4000 funerary "garden" uncovered earlier this week at the tomb of one of Pharaoh Hatsepshut's court officials.  Dead and buried under 50 feet of sand and gravel.
Wonderful city and people, but have they done anything to improve the sanitation and toilet situation?  
Thank you for bringing back memories of Ritan Park.  For me, visits to the park were a noon time sojourn to a small restaurant which, as other comments have mentioned, was a delightful place to enjoy delicious meals at incredibly low prices.  I recall many of the dishes and particularly enjoyed Ma Po Dofu, Dong Po Zhou Zi, Hui Guo Ruo, Yu Xiang Rou Si (and Chie Zi) - and of course Gong Bao Ji Ding - plus Bo Cai and other delicious green vegetables when we could get them - sometimes challenging in the very early 80's in Beijing.<br/><br/>In the early 90's We frequently took driving trips with our colleagues through the countryside heading out to Badaling, moving east toward Mu Tian Yu, picnic'ing somewhere along the way at noon, visiting the Great Wall or not... finding new and interesting places and hiking through undeveloped terrain and finally returning to Ritan Park for a group meal...  <br/><br/>The pictures of the tulips surprises me.  My first visit to the park was in 1981 and my most recent in 2008...  Such changes!
I sought out the Altar of the Sun when I was last in Beijing in December 2015.  Unhappily, I found the shrine completely surrounded by a wooden fence whose locked gate made it difficult to photograph and impossible to approach.  Perhaps there are times when the gate is unlocked but I was unable to find anyone in the area who might have known.  On the other hand, I'd certainly recommend a visit to the nearby Dongyue Temple and, even more so, to the magnificent pagoda at Tianning Temple some distance away. The latter is by far and away the most impressive pagoda in Beijing but few foreign travelers seem to know that it exists.   
Beijing as a "sacred center of China’s spiritual universe"? Let's not get carried away... The city was founded - not that long ago, certainly by Chinese history's standards - by nomadic non-Han people, mostly Manchus and Mongols, up in the northern grasslands and plateaus where 'they' (Manchus, Mongols) felt at home. It represents quite a stark departure - in location, vegetation and climate - from the long and ancient Chinese tradition of setting up the capital cities in the much more congenial South (e.g. Nanjing). <br/><br/>The weather alone says it all: Every September, local residents will remark cheerfully that "Tianqi bu leng, ye bu re -- hen shufu!" ("The weather is neither cold nor hot -- it feels really comfortable!"). Needless to say, this "comfortable" period lasts about two weeks. The rest of the year is all about oppressive heat and humidity or freezing but dry cold, with the occasional sand- and dust-storm (coming from the Gobi desert just to the north) thrown in for good measure. 
Nice article that my father, who grew up in Beijing during the teens through 30's, would have enjoyed.  I spent four years living in Shanghai from 2005-2009, birthplace of my mother and where the family house still stands.  We lived by Fuxing Park which during the Concession era did not allow Chinese entrance.  When I lived nearby it was full of older people doing Tai Chi, dancing and sometimes singing to old Mao era songs.  I loved park life in the city.  We visited Beijing often and enjoyed going to the parks and temples although as a city, distances always seemed further than they appeared.  You article brings back great memories. 
Unfortunately Beijing is also one of the world's most polluted cities, and that doesn't sound very appealing.
As one who lived in Beijing for several years I've speculated as to how much cultural heritage (and economic real estate wealth) was lost when the walls were torn down in 1963 to be replaced by the 2nd ring road (a 24 x 7 virtual parking lot).    I believe had central Beijing retained more of its architectural integrity the subsequent economic revival of China since 1987 would have  resulted in a cultural heritage similar in scale to Paris or Amsterdam.   There is so much in BJ to behold, but there could have been significantly more.
This brought back fond memories.  I served in the US Embassy from 1986-89 and also lived in the Jianguomenwai diplomatic compound.  The city was much as the author described.  We were constantly fighting dust and grime, but it was still a charming place that had yet to succumb to developers' bulldozers.  My office faced Ri Tan Park, and I often ate lunch in a small restaurant in the middle of the park that no longer exists where a plate of dumplings, some pickled cabbage and a beer cost less the $3.00.  Unfortunately, my last memory of the park was on June 6, 1989, when a convoy of People's Liberation Army trucks drove down the street between my office and the park, firing their guns into the air.
What a lovely article. I too love Beijing and especially The Temple of the Sun. I have found Beijing the perfect city to balance my explorations in the Middle East, which seems almost new by comparison. Exploring China has become a delight, and like the writer, I have found it quite easy to gaze past the western media's depictions of China as nothing more than a smog hole stuffed with unhappy people and viewed stunning antiquities, beautiful countrysides and probably the most interesting and gracious people on earth. Thank you for a wonderful article that is also a breathe of fresh air on China. 
I first visited Beijing &amp; much of the border regions in 1985.  Yes, it was hard traveling, but people were re-emerging from a decade of destruction &amp; were finding joy.  There was little to eat, no cooking oil, &amp; nowhere to stay. Still, much of the border region had cultural treasures untouched by the masses:  the Ta'er Lamasery, Yangshuo before the tourists, the cool yogurt of Kunming, the breathtaking sunrise on Emei Mountain.  Economic development &amp; the push against Tibetan Buddhism have exacted a huge toll. I'm glad I saw it when.
My wife and I were in Beijing in April last year and spent an hour or two in Temple of the Sun park. It was the middle of the week and the park was almost deserted.  A highlight was the small pavilion at the top of the hill. The amusement park, along with the restaurant  and beer garden were closed. We must missed the antique store.<br/>It was the Lama Temple which I found most striking as a religious site. I wish we had known of the White Cloud Temple.
I've been lucky in life.  I have had the good fortune to experience many of this planets most interesting cities.  Beijing is special, even among such exemplary counterparts.  If you can, you really must go.  Wonderful people, staggering history, compelling culture and parks no place in the world can replicate.  Only Cape Town evokes as many fond memories for me as Beijing.
Having lived in Beijing for more than 4 years I can relate to the writers effection for the vast and bustling metropolis. I was also struck by how Beijingers were driven by materialism, but at the same time becoming disillusioned by it and slowly returning to religion and other spritual pursuits. As always, great pictures by Adam Dean. 
Wonderful article, perfectly true to Beijing which is a city I am ever so fond of.
As we head toward the 100th anniversary of the May Fourth Movement (May 4, 1919), we should remember that radical anti-traditionalism pre-dates any awareness of the existence of Marxism and if anything brought about the formation of the Chinese Communist Party, rather than being a product of it. The Chinese are coming to terms with a complex troubled 19th and early 20th century. And so are we. Let's work together to avoid any tragic repeats.
Well, Ian, I sense your affection for Beijing, but, frankly, it sounds horrendous. A small patch left of what was once a great park, and an overweening Chinese authority, barely in the background, shaping everything that remains.  Much better than in Mao's day, but still pretty bad. Definitely not on my list...
Not all is well in Beijing’s parks.<br/><br/>Most interesting article except that it presents a Beijing’s park in a biased manner. Nowhere is there any reference made to the omnipresent dying trees due to environmental stress. Nowhere is there any comment on the pushing and shoving, queue jumping that goes on, in which any foreigner caught in it is overwhelmed. Nowhere is there any comment on the army of cleaners and sweepers who collect bottles and papers discarded by visitors. Yes, Beijing is grand, but in an artificial manner. China has grown for the better since my first trip in 1984. Do not get me wrong, I love China, as I made it my area of specialization. I am in Shanghai on a one-year sabbatical, teaching at a national university, and I love every minute of my time interfacing with so many students with great potential. Unfortunately, Chinese do not wholeheartedly embrace their history; they mechanically live their culture, often without understanding it. The majority have lost the spirituality that Taoism, Confucianism, Buddhism, and even Christianity used to bring. Nowadays, they pray at the altar of consumerism. 
In Lhasa and in Tibet in general one can certainly sense the heavy and oppressive thumb of Beijing (same holds true in much of Xinjiang province) but travelers can still find much there that is distinctly Tibetan.  Definitely worth a visit, and the further you get from Lhasa the less you're affected by the harsh political realities.
If you read the last paragraphs, I think you will see that this is not a romantic view of the city.  It is actually sad.  It is as if the state is trying to resurrect past values, and filter them to fit their ideal of what a Chinese citizen should be. It is a charade.
Citizen X:  I imagine there are depressed and dirty areas in Beijing as there are in NYC and Newark and lots of other metropolitan areas, but please specify where those areas are. I'd love to see them in order to experience both sides of the contemporary situation.   
For most of its history, the Chinese government stayed out of the religious life of the people. Now, religion is just one more thing to be manipulated to keep CCP in power. Not so different from present-day American government.
@Gary: That's one of the consequences of living in a country whose constitution prescribes a separation of church and state.  In China, on the other hand, followers of Falun Gong can't worship even in private.  And the few Jews still living in Kaifeng (a city which formerly had a rather large Jewish population) have had their one remaining synagogue pulled down by the government and replaced with a medical facility.  
The Chinese government allows its people to worship any religion at any place as long as they are government sanctioned.  Nice of them, no?
The desert is expanding to the west that is true – global warming if not controlled will approaching the end of 21st C. make all of China, India and other southern areas uninhabitable. But can not lay that one on the Chinese alone who seem to be aware of its implications.  Maybe the capital will be move to Siberia somewhere and D.C. to Vancouver.
@Janet Newton:  Have you actually been there?  Beijing is hardly congested with "sewage and filth."  If a policeman catches you throwing garbage on the street you're likely to do some hard jail-time. Do you similarly believe that New York is the world's most violent city?
   Beijing as a microcosm of the Chinese universe, and for centuries its cosmological center, is a given by almost every author on the city, Chinese or foreign. Consider Wang Jun "City Record," or Juliet Bredon's "Peking." The point that China had other, older capitals, is actually mentioned in the article, but isn't part of the article--it never said that Beijing is China's oldest capital.<br/>   The fact that Beijing was founded by Mongolians is irrelevant, as is the weather. What does matter is that it has been the capital of the place we now call China for almost all of the past 800 years. As for the south being more typical of where Chinese capitals were based, this is clearly wrong. Nanjing was a capital of China for a tiny amount of time (for one emperor at the start of the Ming and for a decade in the Republican era). The great historic capitals were overwhelmingly northern cities: Chang'an (Xi'an), Luoyang, Kaifeng, and, longest of all, Beijing. 
It IS polluted but not usually to the extent that would impair one's ability to enjoy a visit there.  I've been to Beijing about a half dozen times and never experienced the sort of atmospheric difficulty that some photos suggest is an everyday occurrence.  
Sorry. I have to emphatically disagree. Although Beijing has many nice days (and many bad days) pollution wise, it is very difficult to predict when air quality will be good or bad - making it difficult to plan a trip. In the 1980s, September and October were characterized by predictably beautiful weather so fall was the prime season to visit Beijing. Now, however, even September and October don't have predictably good air. One of the worst bouts of pollution I remember here in Beijing was a few years ago in late October. Spring is also not dependably good. Two days ago, the air quality index spiked to about 560 or so - far, far above what is acceptable by WHO standards. Summer tends to be fairly bad (muggy, polluted and still) and late fall and parts of winter are often polluted, too. Last December-January saw a stretch of 10 days or so of really bad pollution. In fact, bad air pollution is increasingly common from late October until the air gets really cold - around early to mid-January. So, yes, you can have a nice visit to Beijing if your roll of the dice turns out well. But it's also very possible that the 4-5 days you allot for your visit will be be during a stretch of terrible or merely bad pollution. Even if the pollution isn't hazardous, average air quality in Beijing isn't healthful.
I go to Beijing four times a year. One can have blue skies for a couple days, but usually the air is "mildly polluted" with an AQI of 150 or so (that would be 300 in the US or Europe). Pollution can be horrendous in the winter. Last November, I didn't go outside without my mask the whole three weeks I was there. You need to be healthy to visit Beijing too. We've brought over Americans as experts to talk to officials, and they've gotten sick even when the air quality is listed as "good". After nearly 40 trips to China, my immune system is strong, but I would not sugar coat the air pollution issue. It's real. It's improving, better than 2011, but still would be considered "bad" by most Westerners.
Excellent comment.  Some remnants of the wall do remain, along with a couple of impressive gates, but it's a shame that that most of it was torn down in the rush towards westernization.  I keep telling people to travel down to Nanjing whose city wall is still largely intact but that magnificent metropolis remains China's most mysteriously untouristed city.    
How lovely that someone else remembers the dumpling restaurant in the middle of the park, our favourite place as children (British diplomat parents posted to Beijing 81-83). As you ordered by number of dumplings (jiaodze?) which were then handmade to order, the challenge was to accurately estimate how many you could eat - and after underestimating a few times and wishing for more after the kitchen had closed, we resolved to really go for it and ordered 100! In our defence I think there may have been 8 at the table but it took so long to hand make them that by the time the steaming mountain arrived no one was remotely hungry anymore!! Back in the early eighties the myriad parks of Beijing were a delight for us - particularly fun in sub-zero winter temperatures when the ornamental lakes would freeze over and impromptu ice hockey games would appear, speed  skating enthusiasts determinedly circling a small pile of belongings (surprisingly no official control of ice thickness or access so you might find yourself hopping across floating crates to get to the thicker ice or indeed losing a puck through the dark patches). Best of all the Summer palace lake where you could skate to an island and where an intrepid US staffer (I think) would ply his windsurf-on-skates over the greater distances much to the local Chinese families bemusement.
Until recently, I did not understand the goals of Mao and his Cultural Revolution. I believed it was a raw power play. In fact, it was an effort to discard the heavy burden of the cultural past that impedes the improvement of the Chinese society. He obviously failed in its endeavour, resulting in Confucianism and numerous archaic cultural practices coming back with a vengeance. For example, women are less equal now than during the Maoist years. Parents of the groom need to pay for an apartment, and possibly for a car before the parents of the bride accept the marriage proposal. I am not a defender of Mao, but he tried to get rid of the burden of history. If China is not careful in addressing this situation, the West will remain the implicit role model of the Chinese. Just look at the advertising in China where the vast majority of models are westerners. 
You definitely raised great points here. "Whitewashing" in Hollywood, fashion, and every cultural aspects, are simply the legacy of post-colonial world. China is the victim of this, where people can easily get decent wage just by "Being White" or "speaking English". But is it the same thing in Japan, Thailand, and a lot of countries that were suffered back in colonial period.<br/>Westerns or I would say "White people" made the rules of everything we have these days, for the developing countries, there's not much power to resist.<br/>My personal thought here (Which I assume I don't represent vast majority of Chinese). I am being critical to my own culture, as much I criticize Western cultural imperialism. Politically, in countries like Turkey, China, Russia where authoritarian rules are heavy. "Picking up old tradition" often means politicians are ready to take conservative path.
This nostalgia for events -- the Cultural Revolution -- that you did personally suffer through is sad.  Sad most of all because of the deaths, and years of the lives of many wasted, brought about in that violent era by Mao's unwillingness to admit his mistakes (such as the horrendous Great Leap Forward famine) and share more power with more pragmatic colleagues such as Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping.
It is so sad what has become of the United States. A country that used to create, innovate and manufacture now just gives it all all way to CEOs and to the grifters in the White House. Every time I travel I am reminded of how low we have sunk. Taxes pay for civilization and technology. There is no reason, except fraud, hubris and seriously screwed up priorities that things are like this. Wish I could be one of those happy Fox News people living in my clueless bubble (oh wait, they are terrified of all the black and brown criminals lurking in the dark). Oh well! I'll just hop on the train and hope to get back to BK in an hour.
I am not sure if anyone is aware but the signal portion of all nyct work is never outsourced, it is done all in-house.  The problem with this is that new technology never takes off.  Older technology stays because the maintenance staff is familiar with it and it guarantees overtime. Also, the newer signal  equipment needs less people to operate.   This does not excite the unions. A sad state of affairs indeed.
I have to say, as someone who previously lived in Brooklyn and has now lived in London for over a decade, I find the claims that Londoners "like" the Tube and that the MTA is dirty baffling.  The Tube is the most unsanitary public transport system I have ridden, due to the fact that seats are covered in fabric, appear never to be replaced, and the system hosting active drinkers who often cannot control their bodily functions.<br/>Add to that the absence of air conditioning on nearly all lines, save a few that operate overground or at shallow levels, and with temperatures rising to 50 degrees celsius, the system is revolting.  The solution of TfL: carry water and please do not signal an emergency if you become ill. Unlike major stations of the MTA, there aren't even fans to move the boiling air around the stations. <br/><br/>As for the signs detailing arrival, these are great until your "minor delays" become "severe delays" after 20 minutes of waiting.  <br/><br/>I continue to use the Tube and other parts of TfL, but like most Londoners, bitterly and grudgingly.  
America,I think is sad to say is fast becoming a third world county.  And the Trumpet is not the guy to make it great again.  Hit the road , Donald.
LOL! Its midnight. My number 1 uptown just turned into a downtown train. The train is reversing back to 125th Street.  Signal failure on the #1 line. 
Kevin Hagen's photographs are worth a thousand words! Wow, the antiquity of this equipment is staggering.
Honestly, this vintage analog equipment is probably far more reliable than anything built today. They'll "upgrade" this stuff at a cost of millions (billions?) and it will be broken and obsolete before they are done with the job.
They are NOT doing it right!  They are trying to mimic the old system and coordinate the new with the old.<br/><br/>The need a transponder every 500 feet to know where the train is?  Have they never heard of GPS?<br/><br/>I absolutely guarantee you if they sent out an Request For Proposal to modern electronics companies to supply a system to equip the entire subway system with a system to let them know, at minimum: 1.  Where each car is at any time within a few feet, 2.  its position in a train, 3.  If the train was moving or stationary, 4.  Speed.  With this information software could properly manage the system.  I further guarantee that this could be done within a few months for probably less than half the cost of their "modernized? system, which is presumably only slightly better than what they started with.
As with most of our country's out-dated and often dilapidated infrastructure, this problem is the result of setting the wrong prorities over a very long period of time. And setting those priorities were conscious choices made by those in public office at all levels. It was not accidential - deliberate choices were made against spending on needed projects such as this.<br/><br/>That's why so many of our airports, tunnels, bridges, rail service, the power grid (the list goes on and on) are all in pretty much bad shape. 
Great pix! Now I dont feel so bad with Toronto's pace at upgrading.
Yes, our subways and railways need their signals to be upgraded - most of these signals haven't been changed since I first rode the subways from Flushing to my mother's mom and dad's on 22nd street and 5th avenue in Brooklyn almost 75 years ago.  However, having spent a good part of my adult working life in a few other countries, including Japan and, especially, China, I think the bed the trains ride on is at least as important for comfort, speed, and safety as the signals.<br/><br/>I became aware in the late 1900's and early 2000's that the Chinese and Japanese were getting rid of the old steel rails on wooden ties system that's been used here and there since the middle 1800s and replacing the wooden ties (what the rails are attached to) with much heavier reinforced concrete ones.  I noticed that the ride on some sections of the railroads in China were MUCH smoother than others, and I asked one of the train masters (at least one on each train).  She said to look at the rails.  I said I didn't know what to look for.  She asked me, "Do you see any movement of the rails?" I said "No".  She said that the less movement of the rails, the smoother and safer the ride.<br/><br/>We do need new signals, but we also need a stronger and heavier rail and tie system.  If you're riding at night on a train with reinforced concrete ties sometimes you don't know whether the train is moving or not.
And why hesitate to invest a few billion $$$?  This is a worthwhile cause!  Have you ever noticed how any time there is a discussion about funding a rail-related infrastructure project, people talk about fare-box recovery, return on investment, concerns that the rail agency in question (in this case, NY-MTA) is operating in the red, etc. --- but no one ever mentions such issues when discussing highway and street infrastructure? Why should our auto roads be considered a "free" public utility while our metro and intercity trains and railroads are held to tight financial standards?  When is the last time someone measured the ROI of the Cross Bronx Expwy, I-95, the Belt Pkwy, etc.?  They and other highways around the country routinely receive gobs of capital dollars.   But rail...  that's another story (yet shouldn't be).
How does New York - self-prolaimed "Capital of the World" find itself in a situation where signals won't be fully modernized until 2045 or beyond? So many nations which are not as affluent have managed to build and expand subway system, light rail and bus rapid transit while we limp along.<br/><br/>Rather than grant tax abatements towards largely empty "supertall" condos, perhaps assessing the full tax rate would create a revenue stream. Perhaps require commercial and residential developers to contribute towards the infrastructure they will affect. It may seem a deterrent, but for now people want to be in New York enough to make this approach feasible.
Has Donald Trump ever ridden the New York subway?
While tax dollars are spent defending illegal immigrants who don't pay taxes.
This leadoff photo of a control room looks like an outtake from the 1974 movie "The Taking of Pelham 123" (the original film, not the remake). The only elements missing are Walter Matthau and Jerry Stiller.
Shanghai has a magnificent underground system, as do many other large cities. Add to that regular and high speed trains networked North, South, East And West, over the whole country,--limited access highways and fine air service, as well.<br/>This is how the Communists oppress their people.
Far more important to spend taxes on new ways to kill people ("defense") than improve people's lives.   Insanity...
The article betrays a philosophy prevalent at the Times that the cure for most any ill is to throw other people's money at it. The current signal system has been badly maintained and is causing delays, but the fix does not need to be a billion $$ CBTC install, which will be botched so as not to improve service too much or enable ZPTO (fully automatic trains, like the Airtrain), or even OPTO - one person operation. <br/><br/>What the Times cleverly leaves out is that NYCT ran more trains at closer intervals and higher speeds a half century ago, with far inferior equipment, over bolted track. Today's subway cars can accelerate faster and they run on heavier, welded rails, and so should run faster, not slower, and more frequently not less.<br/>The difference is primarily the quality of staff and management.  Today's dispatchers and operators could not duplicate the operations of 50 years ago. 
So all the New Orleans Levee Inspectors work at MTA now?
I think that the subways are crowed cause of price and the grafity in there<br/><br/>Shout out to Gavin Brazil<br/><br/>your fan Bill
The taking of Pelham $1 Billion, $2 Billion, $3 Billion.
The basic structure of the current signalling system is very robust.  I think it's a mistake to toss it out in favor of an entirely new system.  The components, all of which were developed before there were any form of electronic controls, and which are subject to mechanical failure, can be upgraded at a fraction of the cost of an entirely new system.  In many cases, modern controls would cost a fraction of the replacement parts that need to be warehoused now by Maintenance of Way.  The electromechanical timing relays that work the lights and trippers can be easily replaced with more reliable devices.  As can the control panels in the towers.  But the existing segment sensors, rail switches, brake trippers and signal lights (which can be updated to LEDs gradually) would be just fine as parts of an updated system.  Even better, this kind of upgrade would not be disruptive to traffic.  Also remember, that a distributed control system like our current vintage one doesn't lend itself to remote hacking.  Let's not lose that particular robust quality.
The NYC Subway has been a political football between Albany and City Hall for as long as I can remember.   As long as NY State controls the MTA's purse strings, the Subway will be in a perpetual state of 1975.  Albany leadership also knows that city residents will won't vote them out solely on the issue of a failed transportation system.  NYC needs to take charge of its destiny by taking over the leadership of the MTA and ending the politicization of NYC's infrastructure.  
I guess we can expect this kind of thing - a failure to maintain and modernize one of the world's most important transit systems - but really, it shouldn't have happened. Too many people played politics with funding for decades instead of recognizing the crown jewel of the American economy for what it is and its vital importance to the rest of the country, not just to New Yorkers. <br/><br/>It's the same with all of our aging, deteriorating infrastructure - and to see how Congress and presidents behave beyond their campaign rhetoric, it's clear that they don't take their responsibilities seriously and don't understand how crucial modern, efficient, well-maintained transportation systems are for the national economy - and that means for the individual lives and livelihoods of hundreds of millions of people. <br/><br/>These politicians with their short-sighted thinking remind me of activist investors on Wall Street - short-term profits rule, and for the long-term, well, just kick that can on down the road. <br/><br/>And so here we stand, stupefied, as that can clobbers us on the head.
Boston is experiencing the same issues with the "T".  New lines are needed and most stations and tracks need an upgrade. I look at all the big multi-nationals being wooed into Boston by our Governor and Mayor. I see all the people streaming into the city to work at these companies. But if people can't afford to live in the city and they can't get into the city from the outer towns and burbs, then what happens! There is never any money for improvements-we keep giving tax cuts to the corporations to get them to come here-re-General Electric, et al.  I say those companies have a responsibility to improve the transportation in the cities where they roost or else let them take the responsibility to get their own employees into and out of the city for work.
No mystery why the New York City subway system is in such disrepair. Unlike other cities with storied underground systems - London, Paris, Moscow, Beijing, Tokyo - New York is not the capital of anywhere. So it does not attract the 'prestige' subsidizing that comes with being a nation's capital city. Good luck with New York City taxpayers voting to make up for niggardliness at the State and Federal level.
Could I suggest a small modification? There is a problem of attribution of agency in the fourth sentence of the article (taking into account the title and subhead), which I think you should correct: rathe than reading "The M.T.A.’s failure to modernize its signal system is a crucial example" you should have written "The failure to tax very-high income earners to increase investments in public infrastructures, including the MTA's antiquated signal system, is a crucial example". 
As a Londoner I found this article really interesting after living through years of engineering works across the network.<br/>Considering most of the infrastructure is 150 years old the tube is incredibly reliable and there is a noticed improvement since work began on the signalling system - I consider myself unlucky if I have to wait more than three minutes for a train.<br/>The main problem is of course money, we have pretty high fares but Transport for London who run the network funnel all profits into upgrades which does help a bit. The grants received from the central government are due to end in a few years so everyone's fears are that afters several years of progress things will stall once again.<br/>Reading about how New Yorkers face at least another 30 years of disruption is pretty shocking and hope they are able to put better systems in place for faster progress on future lines. Personally I think more people need to embrace weekend closures, whilst incredibly annoying at the time (the words 'Rail Replacement Bus Service' bring terror to Londoners) it will save time and money in the long run! Good luck  
That's what you get with unions, no accountability for work performance, and poor service at a high cost. All brought to you by years of political payoffs to Democrats.
So sad. A wonderful city...suffocating under rubble of it's own infrastructure. <br/><br/>And suffocated by politicians whose egos and ambitions came first. And they were reelected! 
Sorry, folks, but MTA leaders mustn't be distracted by 21st century upgrades when their primary job is to find meaningless employment for political cronies and their relatives.  <br/><br/>Someone needs to abolish the MTA and start over.
We're having a regional infrastructure crisis.  The old Tappan Zee is ready to fall down (and hopefully can be held together long enough to allow the completion of the new bridge.)  The tunnels into Penn Station are crumbling.  The MTA's signal system is simply too old.  But, yeah, hey, let's cut taxes.
This is what I associate New Yorkers with... poor subways, lousy roads, horrible bridges, third-rate airports, dirty air, polluted water, a lot of talk, no leadership, high taxes, poor service, no foresight, bribes, kickbacks, cronyism endless whining and complaining! 
We cannot look at the deterioration in subway performance without also looking at the poor urban planning and zoning which is overloading the system.  All the high rises which have been put up along various other lines, along the #7, for example,  has made getting on the train at rush hour almost impossible.  One of our former mayors proposed the solution of removing the seats from the subways cars.  That certainly brought up unfortunate associations.   I cannot imagine what Grand Central is going to be like with the additional thousands of commuters brought in from the new high rises going up in the area, as well as the LIRR which is also being proposed to come into the terminal.  Has anyone actually looked at the numbers of commuters on the concourse or on the subway platforms now?  
In my opinion this is largely due to two things: (1) the increasing unwillingness of people to pay taxes at the local, state or federal level and (2) the growing scarceness of politicians and public officials able and willing to articulate why spending money for the public good can sometimes be a good thing (except perhaps when it comes to more pay and pensions for cops and firefighters, when  it's "god bless the first responders" time since their endorsements are critical).
I last lived and worked amongst you 20 years ago.<br/><br/>The subway, though crowded, worked ok then. Many stations were pretty scruffy, not least underneath the PABT, itself woeful and soiled.<br/><br/>I know the state controls the subway. But it is quite baffling how one of the wealthiest cities in the world has such woeful infrastructure. <br/><br/>The excuse of rider wrath if lines are shut down for installing new signals is just silly. Obviously, it's an excuse hiding some darker reality.
I have lived on the 7 Line for 10 years and have watched it slowly (very slowly) evolve. One of the main reasons it takes so long to make any real changes is because the MTA barely has anyone actually working. If you go through a "construction" section of the tracks, you will see at least 10 MTA employees while one or two will be doing actual work. The others are eating, sleeping in the cranes, hanging out in the empty locomotive car they use to shuttle to and fro, or a group will be standing around watching one "worker" turn a bolt or replace a yellow plastic grate. <br/><br/>I've not only witnessed this once or twice, I have seen it every single day there is construction. 85 percent or more of the "workers" are never actually working at any given construction site (no matter the time of day or night). I really wish I was exaggerating.<br/><br/>If the MTA really wanted to renovate the lines and deliver a WORLD-CLASS system to a WORLD-CLASS city, they would hire hundreds, if not thousands, of workers to get this work done. They would also have a high degree of oversight to ensure that each worker is actually doing something. <br/><br/>How many times have you gone into a store or a restaurant and saw 85+ percent of the employees hanging around, looking at their phone, chatting, or napping? Not very often because when employees do behave that way, they get fired. MTA workers deserve breaks but not in full view of the public, especially given the limited results of these construction projects.
I love Boston but it is an 17th century town (with an infrastructure to match) strangling in 21th century traffic. I know Boston fairly well as I went to school there and live an hour away but I loathe to go there. The traffic is a nightmare and getting out the way of those antiquated creaking, screaming ancient ,electric trains is worth your life.<br/><br/>I don't know how much business they are losing from people like me who used to go to Boston often to shop, go to museums and dinner but have second thoughts. I now go to Providence- easier, cheaper and saner.<br/><br/>Charlie- fix the MTA for God's sake or I'll never return!
NY's subway system is the only system in the world that runs 24/7. This makes maintenance nearly impossible. Shut it down from 1A to 5:30A and add bus routes for those that need public transit during those hours when street traffic is relatively light. Do the maintenance and upgrades during those down hours.
Instead of grandstanding with "free" college education for all Gov. Cuomo shouls use those funds to overhaul the NYC subway signaling technology if not so appalling would be laughable. Updated signaling would improve efficiencies and service.<br/>The cost could be shared by government grants and ridership, and it require lines to be closed during off-peak times to expedite installation and reduce inconvenience. Really, look at those photographs simply unacceptable.
Forgot to mention that the announcement system is absolutely abhorrent. Did they not test the audio system beforehand? I can barely understand anything the engineer/conductor says given they're speaking clearly because there is:<br/><br/>1. Too much noise/static in the announcement or<br/>2. Volume is too low with a lot of static/noise or<br/>3. Volume is too high with too much static/noise.<br/><br/>There are rare occasions when it's a perfectly clear announcement but 95% of time, other passengers and I exchange looks of 'what they did they just say?'<br/><br/>I may be nit-picking certain aspects of the subway system that do not matter as much as reliability and efficiency, but if they're going to spend money on these systems and displays, please do it right. It's the bloodstream of the city and there's just too much plaque building up. 
At a few dollars a head, multipled by 365,  is around 4-5 billion money coming in each year.  They could also raise the price a bit temporarily for added revenue.  I think a lot of people would be happy to pay a little more to ride on something a litle more modern.   
The fact is, just five short years ago, the reliability of the subway system was much better.  Take it from this long term New Yorker--something is very wrong.  The subway is in serious decline.
This might sounds heretical - especially from a life long New Yorker! - but why not consider shutting down the trains for few hours at night in order to facilitate maintenance and infrastructure projects? Late night partiers and overnight workers would suffer, but I think it's likely a worthwhile tradeoff for a better run system for everyone else. 
It galls me to no end that the MTA is spending $12 Billion to get several thousand LIRR riders a few blocks east in midtown while six million subway riders suffer delays nearly every day due to insufficient investment in essential infrastructure. This $12 Billion boondoggle known as the East Side Access Capital Project was not begun by Governor Cuomo, but by Governor Pataki, who, by the way, is also responsible for gutting the Rent Stabilization Law.  
I would guess that more riders are upset by loss of cellular connections in the tube than are even aware of the problems caused by the 90-yr old train control systems.
!.  All human drivers should be replaced by robots.<br/>2. All tunnels should be painted white (which even the cavemen knew).<br/>3.  All stations that are one flight down should have elevator access.<br/>4. The MTA needs to maintain -- soap ( uinknown to this entity except for the super smelly one-- and lots of bleach) and water, and scrapping to get the gum off. ( Power washing -- always use a machine to do a job which can be done more effectively by hand -- does NOT work).. and not redecorate train stations.  Paint peeling from ceilings in passenger waiting areas, dirty floors -- NOT to be tolerated.. But I am sure the kickbacks are much better on unnecessary construction projects such as the one just done at 168th St.. for the no1 train.  The vaulted ceiling simply need washing it did not need a drop ceiling installed.. which BTW put extra weight on the old vault...and cost who knows how many millions as the MTA neglected to put up the signage that was in place when the 96th St. station was redone.  ALSO what idiot makes the staircase step down at sidewalk level  (only the 79th St. Irt station has a handrail to help the handicapped negotiate the step -- and most of the stops lack the yellow stripes that tell people something is a wry.  Furthermore, the card reading machines often deduct incorrect amounts -- I had a 13$ card go to five dollars in three senior trips!!<br/> 5.  Google trains should NOT need signals?? This seems to be old technology.  Who gets the $$?
Everyday I tell myself to make a Twitter account so I can rant at the MTA directly. Why is there 'train traffic ahead of us' at 5:30 AM? Sometimes the 4 or 5 train would have blinking maps or symbols of 2/3 trains. I've been on a D train that had the Q symbol inside. So many tourists probably get screwed over by all the changes that happen on the weekends and weekday nights.<br/>Oh and the arrival times on those touchscreens for the NQRW, such as the one in Union Square, are NOT on time - useless. They installed the overhead time displays for certain stations, but the downtown 49th Street station overhead display can also only be seen if you're directly underneath it because there is another electronic display that's right in front of it that blocks its view. Did people not think about the logistics when they decided to put that there???<br/><br/>I have been to cities in Asia and Europe and NYC has the whackiest and dirtiest subway system. Making excuses to those visiting, I say it has character. I understand that it's one of the oldest systems in the world and it may not be an easy fix but it has some serious catching up to do. The best I've seen is in Seoul where trains are without doubt reliable, platforms have airport style doors, clean usable bathrooms and even a breastfeeding room. I don't care for these amenities but at least make the subways more reliable. We need to catch up. 
While reading this article I was reminded of an old family acquaintance who was a staff attorney for the MBTA in Boston. He had a political no show job and didn't even bother to go in for his weekly pay check as he had the T mail it to him for about 25 years. Different state, different time, but we all know that there are lots of people working at public service agencies who are political appointments. The Port Authority comes to mind. A friend of mine also helped design the Metro Card system as a consultant and she told me that getting anything done at the MTA was almost impossible, especially when dealing with unionized employees. 
The Atlantic published a comprehensive article back 2015. Entitled "Why New York Subway Lines are Missing Countdown Clocks," the article documents a few glaring issues that today's NYT article missed.<br/><br/>Standing out was the MTA incestuous relationship with contractors, including Siemens, where a $13 million pilot for bus times was canceled one year later without achieving anything measurable. <br/><br/>The author of the Atlantic cited a 2009 report by the MTA's oversight organization showing that despite the contractor’s poor performance on that project, ATS program managers had been told by their supervisor not to give Siemens an overall “Unsatisfactory” rating, for fear that this would preclude it from participating in future projects.<br/><br/>The project was later handed over to a group of MIT grads hired to work at the MTA. Bus times were available just months later, and the entire system was completed for all of Manhattan at the cost of less than $10,000 per bus.<br/><br/>The MTA, like all organization, is not making progress in many cases because they lack the in-house technology expertise to complete the projects and are invested in traditional job preservation. This strikes at the heart of big government-funded institutions; the system is dedicated to preserving jobs over providing better service for riders.
It's an old story.  Maintenance isn't sexy so no one wants to do it.  In coop building it results in emergency repairs to unmaitanied systems that cost double or triple what regular maintenance and replacement would.  It's the same for the MTA.  They'd rather hire a million $$$ man from London and keep doing it over and over again than maintaining the rails and signals on a regular basis and replacing them on a schedule.  As a result, it's an emergency every day and it's expensive not just for the MTA but for the people who have to use public transport to get to work.  Of course that's not the May<br/>Or or other top brass who can use a limo or in the mAyors case a helicopter. 
Back in 2011 or 2012, a Chinese student in Shanghai told me she had visited New York City and was surprised at how old the subways were.<br/><br/>They are decrepit because the bottom 90 percent of New Yorkers use them, while the top 10 percent make all the decisions.  Throughout the country the same upper 10 per cent have acquired all the increase in US wealth since 1982. 
I would like to know what is MTA's CEO annual bonus and salary, compared to his London counterpart, of course. The whole MTA situation might be just an  example of crass corporate mismanagement, Detroit-style. <br/><br/>Had the signal problem existed for such a long time, I am sure MTA would have found a way to express it publicly and lobby for its replacement or funding. I am sure New York Times can look into this side of the problem as well.
Give it to the blokes from across the pond to fix - they seem to be better at it!
Do the big-shots of the MTA ride in subways, or in Limousines?  From their viewpoint, having to transport middle and lower class wage slaves to their jobs, is an unfortunate side effect of the banking games that profit them personally.<br/><br/>Evidence?  The high cost and low quality of the transit systems they are responsible for.
I'm certainly glad that Mr. Trump's pledge to repair, rebuild and add infrastructure is being kept. NOT!<br/>He is keeping money from California's High-Speed-Train line as a punishment for CA going for Hillary and to please his rural anti-transit supporters who see transit as superfluous or even a luxury. Apparently  to them, everyone lives the same rural lifestyle of a pickup truck, Walmart being 30 miles away, and a full gun rack.<br/>So ridiculous is the money going to the unneeded wall in lieu of the very needed public transit sector. 
Isn't this the story of America? Republicans hate public transportation so those of us who use it are scorned and the money that should be set aside for repairs goes to new roads. 
Reading between the lines, a large part of the problem is the resistance from New Yorkers to be inconvenienced.  You can't run a subway 24/7/365 and expect maintenance to happen quickly with no disruptions.  <br/><br/>Here in Boston, the MBTA announced that my local subway station, Wollaston on the Red Line, is going to be shut down for 20 months while they completely rebuild it before it crumbles apart.  The community is furious and fuming, but the alternative is 10 years of weekend and night time shutdowns so they have time to do the work.  New Yorkers are going to have to suck it up if they want to have a reliable subway in the future.
I only want to echo what others have said about our nation's desperate need for infrastructure spending. Instead, we've spend thirty seven years playing economic shell-games designed to engorge the pockets of the wealthy, while the rest of our nation and people are left to drift and crumble. <br/><br/>Think about what these subway delays mean in value lost for businesses. New York is one of the major hubs of the global economy, and yet, employees gamble with delays and lateness every day. What does this cost in productivity every year, versus the budget for bringing our transit system up to speed?<br/><br/>This is symptomatic of the short-term thinking that has swamped politics and business for too long. The cost and time to fix problems in the present is seen as "too expensive". The can keeps getting kicked down the road, with only patchwork repairs in place. That's unsustainable. <br/><br/>If we want to be competitive and a global leader in the 21st century, we need to stop sinking all of our money and talent into the military and the financial industry. We need to rebuild our infrastructure, in all its facets. Not only will this create jobs, but it will make average citizens proud of our nation again. It's easier to be optimistic about our nation's future were we to see new and updated improvements, instead of quick fixes made with bailing wire and duct tape.
Doby Gillis......is alive and well underground in the NY Subway.....amazing!
How in the world can the subway system not have been making a profit, ever? They have been running the system for way over 50 years, not putting any capital dollars into the investment to keep it running, and performed maintenance as needed (when something is broken) not on a regular preventive maintenance schedule. Does anyone really believe the audits of money coming in and money going out?
This has been the same issue since I was a student in the early 70's, at Hunter College. We were waiting for the 2nd Avenue subway FOREVER. Money has not been poured into the infrastructure. Companies, back in the day, left New York for the 'burbs because New York could not get its workforce to work on time due to a failing infrastructure. I guess the City had a "if it ain't broke don't fix it". attitude. Most of the major players are dead, will the infrastructure ever get better? I will be retiring soon!
these same problems also exist on the subway systems in DC and SF, despite the fact they were built in the 1970s. Transit systems in the US seem to not be run in a manner befitting a fully developed nation. 
Your story missed two important factors that contribute to the subway's current condition; trophy projects, those that politicians can crow about like the Second Ave subway that only travels 33 blocks and cost state tax payers billions. The second is the high cost of labor, three times more than it would cost to build or repair anywhere else, topped by work rules that dictate progress. There's a lot of blame to go around.
What better example of how this country's infrastructure is being allowed to crumble and held together with duck tape than the NYC subway system? And what catastrophic failure must occur to flip the switch from paralysis to action?
... And yet the proposed solution uses radio signals and transponders every 500ft? Surely in this day of emerging autonomous vehicles a new train or retrofit system could leverage LIDAR/Camera Technology and GPS to accomplish this goal without needing the extensive retrofit of the entire length of track? If Tesla can put semi-autonomous tractor-trailers on the road, surely there is a more state-of-the-art solution to this problem?
I am on the other  side of 80years, and remember when the IRT had kerosene lamps as head lights.  And you know, the subway ran better then without the delays and the violence of today.
The Seattle area is working to make its public transit better. Some parts are now working quite well. We live on the North end of Mercer Island and can get most places rather easily. JGAIA
Easy fix for this, subcontract new tunnels to the Vietnamese and signalling technology to the Japanese. The Japanese built the new metro in Delhi. India has far more problems than the US but with Japanese design and construction discipline built metros in some of the world's most densly populated cities. If you didn't get the tunneling thing, the Vietnamese had a vast underground system of tunnels that completely befuddled American military strategists during the Vietnam War.
It would be worthwhile to take a single paragraph to explain "where the money comes from" and "where the money goes." The MTA clearly explains it in their budget: $9.5 Billion in labor related costs (out of $15.7B budget!). Transport for London dedicates close to one third of their overall budget to capital improvements. Given that the MTA's non-labor and non-debt service share only comes up to 24%, actual capital expenditure for improvements must be bupkis. The real question is what crazy politician will question close to $10 Billion dollars in labor expenses to actually improve the situation?  Certainly not Mr. Cuomo nor any other politician for that matter. I would hope that decent journalists would.
Right now they are getting to a point where they will have to take drastic action. Sure you don't want to upset your passengers but as old as the switching system is, what happens if it completely fails. Then you'll have a whole line shut down for who knows how long instead of a station of two for weekends to get the work done. I lived in London while they were doing the upgrades and yes it was painful, but you learned to work around it. Come on NY, put your big girl pants on and suck it up. People will be upset, but not as upset if the whole thing goes down.
Run by progressives???  I see it somewhat as typical whoever in government runs things does not properly maintain and update them, nor do they want to increase the revenues to actually properly do so.  A business would be bankrupt if they did these things.  Folks like to stay in charge rather than do the job properly.  Now I bet they will be whining for federal funds, which they should only get some, like maybe 10% of the cost of doing things correctly.
I don't envy the Metropolitan Transportation Agency's job when it comes time to upgrade NYC's subway system; not one bit.
As reported by the Daily News today - MTA workers walked away with a whopping $1billion of overtime last year. You can safely bet that most of this overtime was spent either doing nothing or working inefficiently. The whole system is just one big gravy train for their greedy union and the innocent straphanger foots the bill, not only in increased fares but in money lost in their everyday lives from not being able to get to where they're going on time due to the fact that our public transport system cannot have the upgrades it needs. Not a single politician in this city has the guts to stand up to the TWU and end this wasteful greed. You know why? Follow the money. 
The MTA shares the poster for union reform with the Teachers Union. Let me emphasize UNION reform, not member reform. Its very important to split the difference. The workers are amazing, but the orgs are shady cartels that enjoy cloaks of zero accountability.  Did anyone else notice that the 2nd Ave subway doesnt have a modern switching system? Why is that true? Its brand new!!!
That photo of the signaling technology is straight outta Steampunk.  It's not antiquated - it's totally retro and hip!
How about modern everything?
I hate to sound like a Tea Partier, but there is no lack of spending at the MTA. There is currently about $75 billion in capital spending happening right now. Compared to other cities around the world, that's a ludicrous amount.
When I visited London for the first time, I was very impressed by alerts in underground stations, telling riders how quickly the next train would be arriving.  This was in 1987!!   The MTA didn't begin installing alerts like these in NYC until more than 20 years later.  How is it that it took so long for New York to catch up with London in this area?  Where have our transit dollars been going?
What an embarrassment! What an embarrassment. In 6 years that I live here the ticket has gone up almost 20%, and I have not seen much improvement. The intercom system is on par w/ WWI communication. Some subway stations resemble scenes from zombie survival horror video games.<br/>I guess until the 1% will take helicopters into the city the rest of us will have to smell trash.<br/>What a disappointment. 
How did these same (or fewer) tracks and stations accommodate more riders in 1937 than are served today?  See ridership data at <a href="https://vimeo.com/93485551" title="https://vimeo.com/93485551" target="_blank">https://vimeo.com/93485551</a>   video time frame 00:20
I have commuted between suburban DC and NYC for the entire 21st. century. My commute includes the DC Metro, Amtrak and the NY subway. It is no contest---the NY subway wins hands-down for reliability! It may be old and creaky, but it has some redundancy (at least in Manhattan) that provide options; and, despite its age, hats off to the workers who keep it going!  The newcomers (both the Decela and the pathetic Metro, which is only 40 years old) have left me in no-man's land more times than I care to remember. The Metro, in particular, has multiple disruptions on an almost daily basis, despite its promised improvements--and it costs 2-3 times as much as the NY subway. <br/><br/>So, yes, improvements are overdue. Nonetheless, NY subway and your employees--I commend you for doing your best to keep moving despite the increased demand!
Pretty dismal. 
"Amtrak, which owns the station, plans to close several tracks for repairs that will disrupt service this summer on New Jersey Transit and the Long Island Rail Road, two of the nation’s busiest commuter railroads."<br/><br/>Two of the busiest?<br/>Maybe I am blind but aren't the two biggest, by far?<br/>Could you please tell me what the top commuter lines are?  Or update the article?<br/><br/>Thanks
Better call Elon.
The PATH train's signaling system has recently been upgraded.  Sure, it's only 13 stations, but it was done by the MTA-like Port Authority and in relatively decent time.  There were weekend closures all last year, but you deal with it.  Stay home or take the bus.  Whatever.
I imagine there are challenges of "colors of money", but what fraction of the egregious $4 billion spent on the grandiose WTC transit hub would be sufficient to advance the train control system toy, perhaps, late 20th century standards?
In the photo of installing upgraded switch equipment at 34th Street there are 6 workers in the photo and only 1 working ! ! ! No wonder cost overruns and delays !
Am I the only one writing ho remembers how much worse the subways were from the late-’60’s through the ’80’s?<br/><br/>Unbelievable improvements followed. These cry baby commenters don't know of the filthy, crime-ridden, graffiti covered trains, the grimy, dark stations, dimly incandescent-lit, tiles fallen from the walls? VERY scary! Breakdowns so regular, with a 2-hour delay, between station, a/c cutting a week. Daily “this train is going out of service. Another train is following shortly” announcements (always a lie).<br/><br/>These people have no notion how much BETTER, cleaner, more efficient and reliable the system is now!   Bright, florescent-lit platforms, retiled, with ceramic art, crime, graffiti gone!<br/><br/>Now, that is not to say we are in danger of back-sliding. And, after 60 years of NYC population at 7.1-7.5 million, it's amazingly now 8.5 million!<br/><br/>Is it possible the MTA is back-sliding into the same pre-1985 'decay mode? Of course! There MUST be investigations and fixes. (Do NOT blame those track workers! Or 'Unions'! Please!)<br/><br/>And why do signal upgrades creep, but we've seen wifi added everywhere in 2 years, and train  info signs mushroom overnight!? What explains THAT?<br/><br/>There are legitimate questions. All in all, though, all these gripers seem to have NO CLUE as to how much better the whole system is now. That brought new riders, and made the city ripe for today's gentrification. <br/><br/>So, sure, lets get cracking again. But grow up people! The trains are a dream these days!
Sadly, the problems described here are systemic and you can't stop the trains, rip out existing infrastructure and start fresh. This is unlike the Tappan Zee or Koscuisco (sp?) bridge replacements where they simply build another one adjacent to the failed structure. 
There is a very plain reason for the fact that a project to change the signals on the subway system is estimated to take at least till 2045 to be completed. And that is that for some reason the ability to build subway lines themselves is something that we no longer have the capability of doing. Today simply building a couple of new stops on the 2nd Ave. subway line took years, and the plan to extend it in both directions, in particular downtown seems to be beyond our capability.<br/>Contrast that with the speed and efficiency with which the subway lines were built back in the early 20th century. And in addition to the speed in which they built subway lines, building subway lines was so feasible back then that privately owned companies funded their construction and competed with each other and each turned a profit.<br/>And this is in regard to subway lines. Building trolley lines was something that took a matter of a few months. Just about every major thoroughfare had a trolley line. Today the city is planning on building a single trolley line, to go from Greenpoint to Sunset Park, and if things go according to plan it shall take no longer than 5 years to build.<br/>It is clear beyond a doubt that it is beyond our capabilities to build the subway system today. What has changed is not clear. But whatever the reason is, is the reason that a project to change the signal system on the subway is slated to take longer than the time it took for the whole of the subway system to be built.
When I was a kid, long ago in the Bronx, the subway was the same: crowded, smelly, sometimes unpredictable, noisy and dirty. But it opened new worlds, new places, access to majestic and intellectual things and widened my view of the world to come and undefinable possibilities.
The fat cat robber barons who run the MTA, a publicly funded private company, make millions for themselves, and don't even ride the subway (or any public transportation).  They continually cry poor, while with greater frequency, raise fares on working New Yorkers, who depend on this monopoly, to get to and from work, so they may hope to afford the ever increasing costs, while the system continues to disintegrate.  And this is the best public transit system America can present.  To quote another prime exemplar of American waste and failure, "Sad!"
While I appreciate that the NYT is highlighting this critical issue, I find it odd and troubling that the article makes no mention of the Transit Workers Union, or the fact that for some reason the MTA requires that the current signaling system be maintained even if a new CBTC system is put in place (the two running as a redundant system). The MTA will claim this is for safety, but it seems likely that the requirement to continue using the old system is more about preserving labor that would be eliminated with a new system that required less (off hour, OT) maintenance. The Atlantic has a good piece on the challenges with upgrading the MTA signals, which raises these issues:<br/><br/><a href="https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/11/why-dont-we-know-where-all-the-trains-are/415152/" title="https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/11/why-dont-we-know-where-all-the-trains-are/415152/" target="_blank">https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/11/why-dont-we-know-...</a>
And yet MTA fares are so far advanced....
The entire system should be operated by a private company. With a profit incentive, the system would be more efficient. State and local governments are incapable of  managing transportation systems because of political influence. 
I rode those trains for many years. I would prefer air-conditioning that worked rather than new signals. 
From an engineering point of view, any critical system should be duplicated. In the long run, and we are here for the long run, unless we wipe ourselves out, it would be useful for all kinds of reasons to have more choices on subway lines. Roughly parallel lines so sections can be entirely shut down for repairs and upgrades. 
One line of thought that is missed here is the role and importance of substitute modes of transportation. Yes, the subways need to be upgraded. This is crucial.<br/><br/>But at the same time, the burden on the subway system can be lessened by making much cheaper investments on the ground. The city has done a decent job expanding bike lanes, but it is still extremely dangerous to ride a bike. I would love to ride to work, but I'm terrified to do so. I know many more who feel the same way.<br/><br/>Creating new bike lanes and designing them with safety in mind would decrease demand for the subway by providing a viable substitute. And it doesn't cost billions to convert on street parking into bike lanes with proper divisions to keep cars and trucks out.<br/><br/>On that same topic, increase the cost of on street parking and use that to help fund mass transit. It is an absurd waste of space to dedicate entire lanes so that ten individuals can park their cars for pennies. You couldn't dream up a less efficient mode of transportation. <br/><br/>Surface land is extremely valuable and should be dedicated to public transit, not wasted as private storage.<br/><br/>These are simple changes that can help solve the transit equation.
Your photo titled "A worker installing upgraded switch equipment on a track under 34th Street.." says it all - one person working and five simply standing around.  If this is the norm for MTA workers, no wonder the system is in such deep trouble.
I'm sure the unions are wholeheartedly supporting change and improvement in the system.  Democrat city leaders know they will lose union votes if they champion improvements, so you the riders are the ones who get the short end.  Lack of investment in infrastructure seems to be endemic in democrat run cities until it becomes a crisis.  Whine, whine, whine... but never actually do anything, let it become a crisis then blame the nearest republican and ask for a bailout.
As a Midwesterner, may I ask, what do riders do when a line is closed? Can they take the bus, or what?
Hey! That's what you get, when everyone wants to come to New York City! Especially, Brooklyn! And nobody thought of over saturation, without updating infrastructure, as you go! How sweet it is?!!! PS Plus, now you really have a tower of Babel going, like never before...Oy.
This rather neatly illustrates the nature and depth of the problem. "“Fifty years is way too far out there,” Thomas F. Prendergast, former chairman of the authority, said in his final interview before leaving the job in January. “We have to find a way to shorten that.” Now, it's a question of  whether the subways will be rendered unnecessary as increasing automation reduces the size of the workforce and the number of tasks requiring human intervention. It is doubtful that the resources to literally replace the sub-surface and surface transportation systems will ever be available but it would be helpful to recognize this at the outset and realistically assess the politicians wavering commitments before pouring more money into this literal rathole.
If the city's billionaires - including the one serving as President part-time - rode the subway every day, do you suppose maintenance would have been deferred this long?
Where did you get the 6 million ridership figure?
Cities like New York and Chicago need to embark on twenty five year plans to move their rail systems out of the nineteenth century, preparing them for the twenty second. Everything from seats to cars to communications and power systems needs to be redesigned, ripped out and replaced. Go at it one or two lines at a time. Shut the impacted lines down, use a bus fleet and blocked streets for the year or two that it takes to complete the work. The human race has made spectacular technological progress over the past one hundred years. It is time that the population at large was rewarded with spacious, comfortable and safe mass transit. In the airline industry, every inch is reclaimed in the name of profit, this mentality needs to end. The public has paid and worked for a century of technical advances beyond any imaginable, it needs to be rewarded with the fruits of its labor. Hedge fund managers and CEOs will just need to sacrifice one of their helicopters or limo's to help fund a better infrastructure for the millions who have enabled their spectacular gains.
NYC always suffers from the West Side highway syndrome.  Why spend money on huge capital improvements when you can pass it on to the next administration? Obviously the great age of infrastructure projects has passed and the city can no longer afford the improvements. Another factor in the decline of the quality of life and the increasing exodus from the City.
The problem isn't a lack of investment.<br/><br/>The problem is that the public having made the investment, the work was repeatedly not done. <br/><br/>Funds were raided, mistakes were made, powerful people needed to wet their beaks, they ran out of gas, they had a flat tire, they didn't have enough money for cab fare, an old friend came in from out of town, someone stole their car, there was an earthquake, a terrible flood (okay, there WAS a terrible flood), locusts...it wasn't their fault, they swear to g*d...
The technology in the lead photograph looks the same as when the original 'The Taking of Pelham 123' was made...43 years ago.
The math in this article proves that the overcrowding problems can be solved with the existing signaling technology.  The article states that the existing signaling allows for 29 trains per hour, or a train every 2 minutes.  If trains ran consistently every 2 minutes, there wouldn't be any overcrowding.<br/><br/>We don't need technology to allow for additional trains,  The MTA needs better processes (either automated or manual) to prevent the trains from getting bunched up and delayed.<br/><br/>Anyone that rides frequently knows that once a gap arises (e.g. 8 minutes until the next uptown 4 train at rush hour), the situation will keep getting worse.  The train arrives overcrowded, the conductor can't close the doors, and the delay gets worse.<br/><br/>The MTA can solve the core overcrowding problems with the existing signal technology.  They just need to apply some common sense, improve their dispatching processes, and deploy whatever manpower is needed to keep the trains moving with 2 minute headways.
Wow.  In the lead image of the article I recognized the same control board from the 1970's movie "The Taking Of Pelham 123".  And it was old then.<br/><br/>Perhaps off point, the article gives me renewed appreciation for the engineers of the early 20th century.  They knew how to build analog mechanical devices that lasted way beyond a reasonable service life. 
I shake my head in dismay at references to the subway system being "overburdened." More people are paying to ride the subways -- and this is an excuse for deteriorating service? That increase in revenue is creating a problem for the managers of the subway system? You think Macy's would bemoan more customers?
currentky in Copenhagen where transportation is efficient and they are adding new metro stations. many good models in the world, get on it Congress.
By all means... eliminate the alternative minimum tax.
Very few on here want to mention the real problem - and neither does the NY Tines.  The work rukes and pensions for the transit union workers.  The executives are a tiny portion even though it's popular to blame them.  London has good pensions - but as the article noted - they pay much higher fares and get more grants from the British government than NY.  You can't have it both ways.  Each year more and more of the fare goes towards paying ballooning pension costs.  That will make upgrading the system even harder in a decade.  Start cutting all pensions for new workers so in 20 years it will at least be manageable instead of an albatross.  Shut down the lines completely at night.  That is a trade off too.  London doesn't run 24 hours so it's easier for them.  So while it still wouldn't be as fast as London it would be faster than what exists now!
The politicians are long on promises but very short on action. This neglect, which has its roots in a corrupt political system, is unconscionable and just another example of utter neglect of our infrastructure with the motto, the people be damned!!
If it works, don't fix it.
Did anyone here ever own a Chevette?  I had one and it got to be so unreliable that I hated to drive it more than about 10 miles at a time.  It did spend a lot of time "off line" with the mechanic.  However even the mechanic was unable to work a miracle with that car.  That's what our entire transportation system in the New York metro area is beginning to remind me of:  my trusty reliably unreliable Chevette.  As a result of owning that car I have never again bought car from GM, Ford, or Chrysler.  Everyone I knew had the same complaints about cars from those companies.  The abysmal state of the transportation infrastructure is the biggest reason why I never ever searched for a job in NYC.
Not rocket science. If you want a new subway, raise the bonds to pay for it, then raise taxes to pay off the bonds. It's just that easy.
This is why remote work needs to become more common. Tons of jobs that interest me are moving to the tip of Manhattan, but my everyday ride to Soho from uptown was a daily nightmare. The F train would stop between stations around 4 times per ride, and a commute that should take 45 minutes often took over one hour (and sometimes even an hour and a half). I can't even consider working downtown again, let alone at the tip of Manhattan.<br/><br/>The subway system is hampering New York City to an incredible degree. 
I am surprised by the technology they seem to be "updating" to.  Switch sendors every 500 feet? Why not streaming online gps technology.  More accurate, faster. Ie instntanious.  Easy to update.  Each train talks to the other.<br/>Honestly dont need engineers, ooops, maybe that is why?<br/><br/>Anyway seems like 1990 technology in 2017???<br/>My 2 cents
I sure would like to meet the guys who maintain the instruments. I suspect they work miracles getting aged equipment to work, when even the original manufacturer has long gone. Does the subway use 'block signalling'?
Hold the phone. According to the MTA website, they have 277 stations currently enabled with wifi. At any given moment, there are hundreds of thousands of GPS-enabled smartphones connected to this wifi super-network. Yet the MTA "cannot identify precisely where trains are". How many administrative salaries does one have to pay to run a network scan and map the locations of these devices? Am I taking crazy pills? Does the MTA actually employ anyone to think about how to fix this problem? Or is their solution to do nothing and ask for more and more taxpayer money until a catastrophic system failure brings the tired system crashing down?
The actual trains should have been updated over the years as the technology became progressively better. The use of lighter materials to reduce the amount of power needed as well as computers so that the trains can "talk" to each other and the main computer at the same time. Instead, the newer cars look almost exactly the same as the older ones. If I can read the NYT with wifi on my cell phone, the subway car I'm riding in should contain far more advanced computing power than a handheld device. 
As someone who regularly shuttles between NYC and London, I am glad both systems are thriving in their own ways, but face enormous challenges in the short run. I am happy for NY that ridership is way up and the MTA is viable passenger wise, compared to the hell days of the 1970's when riding the subway was dangerous to your life, and ridership was plummeting.<br/><br/>London too is viable and is constant expansion and has risen up to the challenge of overcrowding (think Piccadilly line at 8am). Nevertheless, comparing the two systems is like comparing apples and oranges. London charges fares by zones and it is more expensive than the flat fee charged in NY. London does not operate 24/7 unlike NY.<br/><br/>If NY wants to resolve the problem, they need to bite the bullet and adopt some of the strategies of their British cousins. But, alas, doing some of these things are politically unviable the theater of local and state politics..
We put up with a lot to live in NYC, but everyone has a limit. NYC can't really boast about its mass transit when we're constantly subjected to mysterious delays and overall decay. Fares have more than doubled in the two decades I've lived here, and I could care less about having USB ports on trains and buses (installing an already-outdated technology is an apt metaphor: too little, too late). 
I feel your pain New Yorkers! The MBTA here in Boston is the same mess. Even with fare hikes, there is zero improvement, all that extra money goes to overpaid  employees, just like it seems with the MTA. I gave up on the T after the winter of 2015. Although the snow that year was out of the ordinary, it showed how unprepared they all were. I think the MTA should stop worrying about making customers mad, they are already mad! Shut lines down and get something done!! We constantly have some much to learn from Europe and Asia in terms of public transport, so sick of people in charge not paying attention or caring!!
I was on the Wash DC metro this weekend and its neglect and shortcomings are obvious. The system is attempting to correct what it can under modern reality constraints. Line maintenance shutdowns and inconvenience are, unfortunately, the new realities. Line segments and stations remain closed for weeks. Lost productivity and populace relocation are direct impacts and will only get worse. The NYC system would be wise to start the suffering.
It all starts from the top.   Given the amount of work involved, little can be accomplished if we have a governor who doesn't care about this issue and is not motivated to fix it with upmost urgency.  IF we don't elect a NEW GOVERNOR, lots of people will not make it to see things changed within their lifetime.  Cuomo needs to go!!
I have traveled on subways all over Europe.  The overwhelming majority of trains there are head and shoulders above the dinosaur we have in New York City. Too few trains run. Wagons are jam packed almost all morning and late afternoon. Like sardines. People run to get a vacant seat. Too many delays. Many announcements are not understandable.<br/>And rat-infested, of course. 
As I rider of both both the NYC subway and the Long Island Rail Road, I can assure you that a new "modernized" signal system for the subway system is a horrible idea.<br/><br/>I know this because the L.I.R.R. installed a new, and very, very expensive, computerized signal system a few years ago, and it is a total disaster.<br/><br/>It does not, as advertised, allow clever workarounds for track, switch and power failures.  What is does do, is take a very long time to get back up when the system fails in any way.  In short, it was a gift to the contractors.<br/><br/>The old signal systems put a "human in loop" when a problem occured.  The new "computerized" systems have no idea what to do when a problem occurs - everything must be restored to the original state to get the trains back into service -  and then, the entire computer system has to be put through a lengthy series of tests.  Sometimes this takes hours.<br/><br/>You are not implementing "artificial intelligence" when you install one of these new signal systems, you are implementing "artificial spending".<br/><br/>More to the point, the subway system runs at exactly the same speeds it did when first built in 1904 - the current signal system is perfectly OK for the antiquated tracks, trains and switches.<br/><br/>What needs to be done, is to rethink, and rebuild, the entire NYC mass transit system - subways, commuter trains, and buses.  Providing arbitrary gifts to politically connected contractors at the expense of riders and taxpayers is not a solution.
Great article, informative and timely. Unfortunately by tomorrow it will be yesterday's news. Failing infrastructure is the bane of America from highways, airports and sea ports to bridges, tunnels, and yes, subway systems. All are part of our unseen decline as a country and as a world power. We seem to be more interested in partisan politics and name calling, demonstrating, marching with catchy slogans on place cards, what bathrooms we are aloud to use, and safe spaces for snowflakes than tackling the issues that will position America for the future.<br/>The American electorate had better start to wake up and choose leaders that will prioritize what is important for America as a country. Right now politicians operate under the banner ME FIRST- PARTY SECOND- COUNTRY THIRD.<br/>Tune in tomorrow and see how much coverage is given to infrastructure.
I'd like the entire NYC MTA ridership to strike for a day to show how unhappy we are with fares and service.  I'm lucky to live walking distance from work, but Harlem may as well be Philadelphia when riding from Brooklyn to visit family and friends on weekends.  The MTA still cries a river every year asking for more money from riders when service and facilities are worse than they've ever been.
At some point the people in control of planning these projects will identify the obvious solution to mitigate the inconveniences of closing down an entire subway line...real express bus routes and bus lanes. <br/><br/>There should street closings during certain hours to alleviate the need for buses to stop at every cross section, etc. bus lanes across east river crossings and a massive increase in bus service to offset the subway ridership on these routes. <br/><br/>It is time to inconvenience cars to accommodate the citizens of this city who rely on public transportation. 
No stats available on how much time would be saved by going digital or how many more riders would be accommodated. Would it really be worth the time/expense/risk? Digital system would make the system vulnerable to system attack, hacking, etc. Keep it analog and just upgrade the analog equipment with more modern mechanisms and parts made from improved materials, then even a magnetic burst of radiation won't stop you.
MTA and all transportation administration and planning need to be separated from Albany into a regional body, independent of New York, New Jersey and CT state oversight. A regional authority with boundaries comprising the metropolitan statistical area that plans, executes, coordinates and maintains all transp. systems is a more rational structure. Also, every position needs to be "professionalized" (read: no political appointees). An independent audit commission should make annual reports available online to the public, revealing all revenues, payments and future obligations. This entire metro region represents 20%+ of national GDP. It needs a central authority with citizen oversight, transparency and taxing power, with no revenue sharing to states or cities, unless they are investing in complementary transit and building projects (TOD-or transit oriented development).
Upgrading the signals (with equipment installed every 500 ft. as per the article) is no doubt a big undertaking. But the labor, cost and coordination of this undertaking should only be incremental compared to the frequent track work that is done on many of the lines. That work requires the coordination of many workers and (literally) tons of material. As track workers are deployed to do their work (usually during off-hours and weekends), why can't the MTA deploy some additional electricians to mount and connect the signals required to modernize the system?
Subway cars should have five doors to facilitate entering and leaving. The cost of this change is minimal to the increased passenger capacity, i.e.,more doors result in increased capacity and faster loading and unloading time during rush hours. The system should also reduce express stops (gradually convert suer express), eliminate local stops with 1.2mile of each other, and more closely integrate bus and subway transportation.
"Due to signal problems at Union Square, all Brooklyn-bound trains are running with delays from 241st Street to Coney Island. We apologize for any inconvenience."
In Germany I heard people saying that the US is the richest among the underdeveloped countries, especially its public transport system. Whenever I return to NY from Europe with its much more efficient public transport, and not only in London, see the rickety, overcrowded and mostly late trains and find myself again on one of the filthy, stinking platforms, I am reminded of this, saying to myself how true this statement is, sadly. 
Words in this article to describe the trains and signaling equipment like "antiquated" or to describe the re-development process "glacial" are really telling. I am going to assume it's not just the NYC subway that can be assessed with these choice words. This country is crumbling. It makes the talk of building a new border wall preposterous. 
I want to agree with this, but I have to agree with the comments about where the money goes, and how it's spent. The MTA only hit its deadline of opening that first (relatively) small phase of the 2nd Ave. subway after being harassed in public about potentially not meeting it. There were reports of workers getting drunk during the day in bars near the construction. Then after so much overtime and working around the clock it all happens. But did the overtime send everything over budget? Its middle-ground of being a public and private company keeps all the accounting in way too murky territory for it be just be handed whatever billions of taxpayer dollars it's asking for. I say, if anything, give it in tranches. And have it meet certain requirements before the next one is given out. Increased ridership and fare hikes should be giving it more revenue. Where's it all going? 
For anyone who's traveled on any other subway system in any part of the world, we should be ashamed of the NY subway system.  The subway staff seems to represent the condition of the system also.  Shameful 
The system is broken - up and down.  It's amazing that it still operates every day.<br/>That alone tells me that it can be much, much better.  Just look around at the stations, tracks and other infrastructure.  I was amazed to see at substantial completion of the Smith/9th Street and 4th Avenue "F" line stations and viaduct rehab, a few years ago, that while major improvements were implemented, no one removed the piles of accumulated bird droppings that were lodged on the viaduct's steel trusses and other structural members.  This of course causes significant corrosion of steel and concrete.  The guano piles are still there today.  These are just the piles that can be readily seen from the subway car.  Imagine all the piles that cannot.  <br/><br/>There is absolutely no accountability.  People need to be fired - period.
The MTA is a very inefficient organism. Cuomo needs to be held accountable for this mess. All executives and leadership of the MTA should be either fired or their fat salaries cut in half. Why should we keep paying higher fares that go to the pockets of these oligarcas.<br/>After a new leadership is installed a new culture needs to be quickly stablished. Most MTA employees don't really understand that they providing a service. We are paying their salaries and we should be able to get good customer service. They are not trained to provide a good level of service and/or are completely ignorant of what that looks like.<br/>The MTA needs to hire consultants and technicians from London and Japan.<br/>Some of these MTA executives should take a trip to Tokyo to see how their system runs, they will immediately be ashamed of themselves. The Japanese know good service and teach their employees accordingly, if there is ever a problem in their system it's quickly resolved! There is no excuses and waste of time. This is because their culture is geared to the common good unlike here which is the opposite. The MTA should aim to create this same culture of service in their employees and their company in general. A Japanese executive will never accept a salary increase if their system was crumbling like ours. This is because they sincerely care about doing a good job and sincerely care about their customers and let them know that. Most importantly they have honor and integrity in all their actions.
This along with the equally straining situation with the aged Penn Station are just two examples (of countless many) of 37 years of 'Starve the Beast."  Yep - it's more important to pour two trillion (and more) dollars into an "off the books" illegal Iraq invasion and war and nearly half a trillion bucks to the dead-end F-450 bomber.
Wait a second! I thought Walt Disney resolved this problem decades ago with the People Mover.
There are so many informative comments from readers with a technical appreciation for the subway system and MTA labor issues.<br/><br/>I'd like to learn more about the intersection of unions/labor and the high cost of service and maintenance.  <br/><br/>I understand from other articles that the MTA spends multiples of what other transit systems spend to construct subways of equivalent distance and complexity.   The question is, why?  Because we won't be able to afford to keep up with London and Shanghai if our mass transit improvement costs are 2X-5X of what they pay.<br/><br/><a href="http://www.politico.com/states/new-york/city-hall/story/2015/03/where-the-transit-build-costs-are-unbelievable-000000" title="http://www.politico.com/states/new-york/city-hall/story/2015/03/where-the-transit-build-costs-are-unbelievable-000000" target="_blank">http://www.politico.com/states/new-york/city-hall/story/2015/03/where-th...</a><br/><br/><a href="https://www.citylab.com/transportation/2011/11/1-billion-doesnt-buy-much-transit-infrastructure-anymore/456/" title="https://www.citylab.com/transportation/2011/11/1-billion-doesnt-buy-much-transit-infrastructure-anymore/456/" target="_blank">https://www.citylab.com/transportation/2011/11/1-billion-doesnt-buy-much...</a>
At this point I don't even care if they close down parts of the subway during the weekend, the summer or at certain times during the night, just let us know so we can take an Uber. bus or bike.  At the rate they're going by the time the fix one problem 2 more arise.  November 6, 2018. Mark the date folks if there's a half decent candidate out there we can make a statement and send Cumo on his way.
Trump will make America great again. I saw it on a red ball cap.
Between this and the grossly outdated steam system underneath NYC, I don't see how we stay competitive in the 21st century. This infrastructural disaster cum crisis in the wings is a frightening harbinger of things to come across the nation. Remind me why we pay such outrageous costs to live here again.
"Key to Improving Subway Service in New York? Modern Signals". <br/><br/>The infrastructure is outdated, overcrowding exists, executives are continuing to receive higher salaries relative to the blue collar workers,and so on and so forth. How about more new trains, more money for infrastructure, more modern-looking stations, and friendlier ticket-takers willing to smile once in a while? The photos in this feature article appear to look like something out of the 1930's. <br/><br/>Where's the Trumpster when you need him?
Nothing new here. We have similar problems in Montreal with our Metro subway system. Rates for riders go up each year, as the executives pay rises even higher. New train cars for the Metro didn't fit well, and needed to be repaired. Accommodation for the handicapped is poor, with elevators projected to be built by 2020 in some stations for the handicapped. Breakdowns occur intermittently with repairs taking hours, as riders are hard-pressed to use busses.  And best of all, extensions to our Metro are to be built towards the French part of town, as the English sector of Montreal languishes, with NO extensions proposed.
This situation is the poster child for everything that is wrong with infrastructure in this country.  It cannot seriously be the case that it will take longer to change the signals in the lines than it took to build the lines in the first place.   If we fought World War II this way (on the home front), we'd all be speaking German . . . . Hire all the contractors from the London subway work to do the work and get it done.  Signaling is the cheapest way to increase the capacity of the subway and it does not require boring new tunnels and tearing up the streets. 
work on one half of a line at a time. Take the 1 train. Shut down the Uptown track for work, and run trains Downtown during the morning, and Uptown after 3pm on the one working track. ABCD trains and buses take up excess capacity. 
"Highlights From the Opening of the Second Avenue Subway"<br/><br/>                                                   The  NY Times         1, 1, 2017<br/><br/>......It was only a matter of minutes before passengers began to complain on social media about the new Second Avenue line.<br/><br/>Emily Ngo, a politics reporter for Newsday, wrote on Twitter that her Q train was delayed at the 63rd Street station, the last stop before the new extension starts, because of signal trouble. She said riders were amused by the delay.<br/><br/> I'm on the 2nd Ave subway. It's stopped at Lex-63 station. Conductor says train is "experiencing some signal problems." Riders laugh ...<br/> — Emily Ngo (@epngo) Jan. 1, 2017<br/><br/>A $ 4.4 Billion extension, adding 3 stops, nearly a century in the making, - and  the signal system on the 2nd Ave line was not upgraded with it ???
Every mass transit system in the US is in a similar situation, only on a smaller scale -- Washington, Boston, San Francisco, Chicago. So what's the problem and what's the solution? The problem is that neoliberalism has been the dominant political ideology since at least 1980 and it places no value on social investments and the non-private sectors. The solution is a political ideology that values society, is willing to invest in social enterprises and is comfortable with a large non-private sector.
Deteriorating Infrastructure aside in the days of WI-FI, digital information screens and Twitter there is no excuse for the MTA's lack of communicating subway information to its ridership. How many times as a New Yorker have you been standing on the Subway platform waiting for a delayed train with no announcements or digital updates and no idea if the wait will be 5 more minutes or another hour.
There's always a corruption / incompetence component when discussing New York City Transit. The system's making more money now then it ever has. It has a ridership that's greater then any in the last 75 years. It a bus and ferry system that should be utilized more efficiently to ease the flow of ridership to modernize this track / signal work on their subway lines. But invariably the governor and transit officials will conclude that the answer is more money. Whenever these elected bozos are faced with a challenge they can't solve, ( which are far too many), the answer is always more money. And when they get the funding they put in into a trophy project like the second avenue subway line.
Why don't they hire Guillani to fix it.  He can do anything, right?  I mean, he cleaned up 8th Ave and Times Square.
Yet, the MTA raises prices and continues to give us bad service and a dirty subway system.  
The MTA spends nearly $3bln annually on pension/health care.  Its pension is still underfunded by close to $10bln.  These costs are only going up, meaning riders and taxpayers will continue to pay more for their rides for less service as the money is siphoned off to the pensions.<br/><br/>Restructure the pensions, cut the benefits and invest in the infrastructure.<br/><br/>The MTA is in business to serve its ridership, not as a piggy bank to public service employees.
Why are we on the cusp of self driving cars while our MTA trains still require a human to operate them?  Why does a train with four cars require two conductors to check tickets?  Why do all the MTA construction projects my train passes have so many workers just standing around while some work?<br/><br/>The MTA is an arcane system from lack of technology to outdated union rules.  
When the inefficiencies of city government became too much for<br/>Donald Trump to bear during the reconstruction of the ice rink in a central park he offered to do the job for the city.  The city had no experience in the construction of an ice rink.  Trump hired a Canadian firm to complete the job efficiently.  It seems this is another instance where the private sector could be more efficient thus reducing the burden on the public.  President Trump is too busy at this point of his career.  Maybe Bloomberg could step up and get the private sector involved.  
You have an editorial now called the "Cost of Obama's Speech." The real cost of Obama was his 8 years in office, a $17 trillion budget deficit, and the audacity to  say sorry folks, but there's no such thing as a shovel ready job.<br/><br/>Why not investigate where all that money went?   
All of the comments in the world will not change a thing here. This is just a venting page. Nothing will change, nothing. It will only get worse. Get used to it.
$32 BILLION!! 10 Years!! Ridiculous. whatever they build will be obsolete before they finish building it. How about this; Put Internet antennas every 500 ft in the tunnels then put a transponder on each car ala EZ-Pass and there you have it. You will know where every car in the system is. You could also get the telecom companies to put the antennas in for FREE.<br/><br/>Google et. al. can create a car that drives itself in traffic and crowds for a couple of billion, but the MTA can install a system of basically Stop Lights for 10 times that amount on a system where the cars don't have to steer! Pitiful!
The MTA is a joke. We saw that pretty clearly during Bridgegate. Anyone remember the LIRR disability pension scandal? Apparently no one cares about the dysfunctional (corrupt and incompetent) management. I really hate this city more and more each day.
The MTA could turn the most leftie progressive into a free market conservative.
Oh my. When it comes to their subways, dear NYT readers have had enough. We hear complaints about public sector unions, waste, and poor service. Yet when the same dynamic creates similar problems with inner city school systems, no problem. Visit an inner city school (as if you could), they are the MTA of education.
This was a very eye-opening, informative piece; thank you for providing insights to a system that we know so little of yet heavily rely on for daily commutes.
Did anyone ever think of improving the surface transit system in New York in order to help alleviate the problem in the subways. Look at the ridership on buses and you will notice how many of them are running half empty even during rush hour. Over the last few years New York Transit has invested millions in the new sleek double size buses. What good are they if they don't serve the public's needs? Riders complain that the wait for buses is maddening even when compared to the wait for trains. And now with Select buses riders are required to purchase their tickets and special kiosks and cannot board a bus without a special ticket.  Select buses are meant to speed up the movement of buses as money and metrocards cannot be used on them. (payment is made in advance of boarding).  In theory this system should work but it is not popular among riders. We need an efficient  bus system to complement the subways. If more people are able to find an alternate route using a bus there would be fewer people dependent on trains. 
There is really no alternative to riding the subway in NYC. That is why everyone rides it, from the working poor of the outer boroughs to the Wall Street billionaires. That's also why the city can get away with not improving it, because they know we have no choice but to pay $2.75 per ride, regardless of delays and closures. Given the price we pay to live in this city (those taxes! that real estate!), it is astonishing that so little has been done to improve a transit system this outdated, costly, and dirty.<br/><br/>I've spent time in cities like Moscow and Bangkok that have less wealthy economies but far superior public transit. Those places acknowledge that this is a public amenity. When will our country shift its focus away from lining the pockets of plutocrats and devote funds and labor to improving ordinary people's lives?
Forget London.  Too many foreign parts<br/><br/>Federal Transit Administration to Metropolitan Transportation Authority <br/><br/>"Dear Mr. Prendergast:<br/><br/>I write to follow up on my letter of July 25, 2014, regarding the Federal Transit Administration's Buy America investigation into the New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority's (MTA) water mist fire suppression systems needed for the Second Avenue Subway Project. This letter serves as FTA's Decision in the matter, and for the reasons set forth below, I find that a water mist fire suppression system is a "manufactured end product" for purposes of FTA's Buy America regulation at 49 C.F.R. part 661. Consequently, Marioff Corporation's HI-FOG® water mist fire suppression system, which consists of components manufactured in Finland, does not comply with FTA's Buy America requirements, and given FTA's financial participation in the Second A venue Subway Project, MTA must acquire water mist fire suppression systems that consist of components manufactured in the United States."<br/><br/><a href="https://www.transit.dot.gov/regulations-and-guidance/buy-america/second-avenue-subway-projects-water-mist-fire-suppression" title="https://www.transit.dot.gov/regulations-and-guidance/buy-america/second-avenue-subway-projects-water-mist-fire-suppression" target="_blank">https://www.transit.dot.gov/regulations-and-guidance/buy-america/second-...</a>
<br/>Instead of building a silly wall, INFRASTRUCTURE is what is needed throughout this country.   This should be a no brainer.  This is where the federal dollars are needed NOW.  Don't even get me started on the safety aspect when updating, improving and maintaining infrastructure is ignored. 
This is a great article, well written and informative. I think updating the signal system and improving cars, tunnels and stations should be part of President Trump's infrastructure spending bill. Shanghai is even larger than New York and has an excellent subway system, most of it built in the last 20 years. I think Governor Cuomo should approach President Trump and suggest that there be federal funding to modernize the New York subway system. Hopefully they are on good terms.
This article is misleading. <br/><br/>Signal failures are proportional to the amount of preventive maintenance. Maintenance is down because of high labor costs, which are high because the unions have taken advantage of the fact that transit workers are the only class of employee in the United States with more labor rights than their management, due to Section 5333 of the Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964.<br/><br/>Service reliability itself is largely tied to schedule design. The NYCT system's service frequencies have all been cut back, due to high labor costs. When gaps open up in the service, people really feel it.<br/><br/>Older signaling technology can sometimes be of high capacity, and newer signaling technology can sometimes be of low capacity. It all depends on how it's done. <br/><br/>The real benefit of new signaling these days is that complete driverless operation is possible, especially if you time it with delivery of new vehicles. Yet NYCT did not do this on the L, which was a mistake. They can increase capacity with current signaling, but they don't have people in the right positions who know how to do this.<br/><br/>The reason all the things I am saying don't get much visibility is that NYCT does not have many talented people working there. This is because their pay structure is only satisfactory once you've worked there for decades. This means they cannot reward talent. No one with talent wants to work for someone who has been there for decades, who has never seen what's been done elsewhere.
After riding the MUNI Underground here in San Francisco (the precious little part of it that is indeed underground) and the NY City Subway, the NY City Subway in its current incarnation seems fast and efficient to me. 
"Much of the signaling technology predates World War II and is decades beyond its life span"<br/><br/>Imagine if it was now disclosed to the public, as is being done here,  that vintage electric systems as pictired were still used by our Air Traffic control operators. <br/><br/>There would result from Congress , an immediate  "Pentagon" type unanimous effort to rebuild. <br/><br/>But Congress isn't interested here, its New York , its Northeast.......its local in their view.  Funding is all by region these days. "Its us and them"   
One thing I'd like to figure out is exactly how the "aging signals" contribute to delays?  I say this as a computer programmer and microelectronics hobbyist.  One great thing about the current system is that it is robust and dead simple.  There is a great deal, a VERY great deal, to be said for that when the system is going to be subjected to periodic salt water baths.  We could install a fiber-optic or wireless network and gather telemetry data on every single piece of equipment but hardening it against flooding will be hard and if it gets wet, it's toast.  With the current equipment you just have a very annoying job of cleaning contacts but then you're back in business.  Also, since trains frequently stack up waiting to enter stations during rush hour it would appear that loading and unloading are the chokepoints so tighter bunching of trains won't help.
The biggest problem of rail passenger service and subways is this:  Its 19th century technology staffed by people fixed in 19th century thinking.  And its not just the technology, its union work rules that also need to change. 
The real issue isn't money, or lack thereof.  It is accountability.  What, exactly, has happened to the billions dumped into the MTA?  How much are administrators making, and what do the do?  How many are there?  And what about the workers - are those that don't do their job EVER fired?  Nope.  <br/><br/>I'm tired of the NYTimes crying for more money for all of their emotional outbursts about what is wrong in NYC, and this country.  How about a little accountability for spending of tax dollars?!!
Always hard up for money is the fall back cry for everything. Yet Mayor DeBlasio just announced he found $100million to extend grass on the east side greenway. <br/><br/>How come nobody can ever find money for the subways/railroads but can find it for grass and other nonessential amenities.
With significant fare increases on regular basis, it blows my mind that MTA has not modernized their signal systems long ago, and I have to suffer so much overcrowding, delays and low frequency of train arrivals (C train) on daily basis.  Where have MTA spent the money?  In efficiencies, bloated personels, and  corruptions are what comes to mind.
First, this is a great article. Next, some ideas:<br/>1) As many comments here say, too many MTA workers really don't work for their entire shift.  I'm not saying take away the lunch or dinner break, but some of the work rules are absolutely insane and cost the system tens of millions of dollars in lost productivity.<br/>2) Currently, CBTC is being installed over weekends on the 7 train.  With a schedule like that, it is no wonder that the work will take decades to cover the whole system.   Let's take  the 4,5,6 line and shut down large portions (like from Brooklyn Bridge to the end of the 4 and 5 lines) overnight from about 9:30pm to 5:00am) and have a swarm of workers doing the work, every night for 7 hours or so until that section is done.<br/>What would be the costs?  What would be the time frame to complete the work?   Yes, it would be inconvenient, but I have no doubt that it would be cheaper and take less time.<br/>The cost of capital construction on our subway system is the biggest factor in getting things done.  No other city in the world has costs that are so high, despite having all the same engineering issues we do.  First, we need the political will to change how the MTA and its workers work.  Second, we, as the users of the system, need to deal with the inconvenience of that work being done.<br/>There is no other way.
It seems like the biggest worry the MTA has when it comes to upgrading our archaic subway system is griping New Yorkers. Might I suggest that the city do a better job of communicating that these delays/closings are for New Yorkers' benefit, and will help everyone in the end?
I cannot understand how complicated this system must be in order to track trains. We have sensors on virtually everything else to track its whereabouts. My college town put sensors on all of the buses to track them real time. Snow plows in Chicago now also have real time data tracking. It took a matter of months to roll these trackers out, how is it that this NYC system takes decades and potentially $20 billion? It sounds overpriced and convoluted. 
What the article does not state, and which the MTA would certainly be unwilling to talk about, is the potential for System shutdown due to multiple, simultaneous failure of the antiquated equipment.<br/>It's a credit to the engineers who planed the pre-WWII technology that it has lasted this long, and is also a credit to the engineers and workers who maintain the present system. But the knowing criticism of rodents and just plain corrosion make system disaster a matter of time.
Just the existence of this article, especially its placement on the front page, makes me feel validated and less crazy. The subway has become so unmanageable that I avoid scheduling my patients at the start of the day because I can't guarantee that I will be there on time, no matter when I leave my apartment. It is a real tragedy that such a magnificent system is not receiving the maintenance it deserves, and just underscores the importance of prioritizing essential services like infrastructure and transit. We just want to get to work on time.
Important article, thank you.  Please keep reporting on this critical issue which has lacked the attention it deserves.  It effects the lives, health &amp; safety of millions each day.
I agree, the article details what was once unknown, so when I'm on a platform in full on complain mode, I now understand why the service is so poor.<br/>That being said, why weren't the signals being replaced piecemeal 30 years ago when they were at their limit? Why wait until the system is falling apart?<br/>The old excuses don't hold muster, like the system's age, as London has shown. <br/><br/>So, in conclusion are we to surmise that 28 more years of misery are in store? Looks like yes. OY!
A couple of decades ago, '60 Minutes' reported about an aging bridge in Cleveland that had been painted over the years, but only where the voters could see the new paint. Underneath, the rust was so bad that the bridge might have to be condemned and closed. More often than not, politicians don't want to take responsibility for the infrastructure we can't see. That's the next guy's problem. 
Well I did not vote for Trump but does the word infrastructure ring any bells?
Good grief!  I saw more modern technology at IEEE - in New York City, no less -<br/> over 50 years ago.
Number of trains per hour (TPH) used to be 30 or more in rush hour on all major lines as far back as the 70's. Three things not tied into antiquated signaling have conspired to reduce this number:<br/>    (1) changes in passenger riding patterns - there has been a flattening out between rush hours and midday/weekends - fewer passengers in rush hours and more in the other periods.  Back in the sixties, large numbers of trains were routinely sidelined during midday and weekends because they weren't needed.  This probably made overall maintenance easier as equipment wasn't on the road as constantly.  Rush hours are just as crowded today but with fewer TPH needed, until now.<br/>    (2) Passenger behavior - the dwell time at stations has increased.  Observe how long it takes from the first time a conductor tries to close the train's door until it actually leaves the station.  Passengers know they can block doors with impunity and they will be reopened.  This needs to change in order to speed things up and increase capacity.<br/>    (3) Operator behavior - a series of operator-caused accidents over the years resulted in the elimination of routine "keying-by" of red signals, allowing trains to (slowly) get closer to each other, generally near stations in rush hour.  This, coupled with some maddening speed restrictions, further reduces capacity.  Why, for example, must northbound trains slow to a crawl before entering 59th Street-Columbus Circle on the ABCD lines?<br/><br/>So lots more to be done.
The MTA doesn't have to look to London to find out how to implement a moving block train control system.  At the San Francisco Municipal Railway in the 1990s, Alcatel's moving block system was overlaid on top of the old fixed block system while maintaining high-ridership operations.  The cut-over to high frequency service was smooth.  And it didn't cost billions of the dollars at the time to get the job done.
England recognizes London's importance and therefore funds the city accordingly. That type of thinking in America, toward New York, would help a lot.
"At the current pace, transforming every subway line could take half a century and cost $20 billion."<br/>20 billion just to upgrade the signal system. There is 660 miles of track. So that comes down to 30 million a mile, or 5700 buck a foot, 478 bucks an inch.<br/>Surely we can do better then 478 an inch.
Everything in NY that is controlled at the state level is subject to the inefficiencies and corruption that are endemic in this state.  Big government breeds big problems.
If the MTA isn't open to a complete audit for wasting taxpayer funds, with criminal accountability, then no other business should ever be held accountable.  How they can go through BILLIONS of dollars for so little to show is disgusting.  Every New Yorker who pays taxes should be 'mad as hell' over the waste of their hard earned money.  No wonder people do not like to pay taxes, they get so little in return for so much given.  Who will be MTA's first indited criminal?  It cannot happen soon enough.
I have been waiting for the NYT to do this story for 40 years. A modern signal system would permit trains to run much closer, and increase system capacity - without one inch of new track - by 33%.<br/><br/>A tax on Wall Street financial transactions would easily pay for this (and many other necessary infrastructure projects).<br/><br/>Meanwhile, Sandy repairs have cost billions and have not yet been completed.  NYT: Investigate whether we can protect the subway tunnels today if we have another Sandy event tomorrow.  My guess is that the answer is no.  <br/><br/>Where is the leadership?
Why are we complaining? There's no point. Those in power are not listening. The rich and the powerful don't use the subways. They have their golden planes and limos to transport them from point A to point B. And they hold the purse-strings. The dingy room with with the archaic tools are at least there to bandaid the archaic subway system. We, the little people should be grateful we have a subway!! What are a few accidents with few of us dying and many more injured. Nobody gives a damn about delays, overcrowding and tunnels collapsing which the minions have to endure. We should be grateful to God for small mercies. Our tax money only is for trips to Mar-a-lago and the like. Once again we the 99% are held in bondage to the 1%. Archaic, crumbling Subway system? Suck it up. After all it is just a miniscule part of our crumbling infrastructure. Upgrades? Wishful thinking!
America is not into caretaking, maintenance and repairs.   America is into waste.
All I know is that when I used to have just a TV antenna on my house I always had reception.  Since I've switched to cable and satellite, not a week goes by when it's not gone out for some length of time.  Seeing something in HD really has little use when there's nothing on to begin with.
Maybe it's time for America to change its money logo from "In God We Trust" to "Get Something Done."
It is simply irresponsible to write an article about the failing NYC Subway and not mention the time and money the heads of the MTA and the unions have squandered away.   There is a very long and documented record of this (and you even show it in the picture).  How can you report on the state of the subway and talk about how little has been done by completely ignoring the labor issues and chronic waste of the MTA administration - just irresponsible journalism. 
we spend it on defense, the cost of the F22 program is 62 billion . don't you feel more secure  ?
Do we really need the subway to run all night? Closing the system for a few hours each night (midnight to 6:00?) would permit maintenance and cleaning and probably save some money. Add scheduled weekend closings for major projects (e.g., signals) and it might be possible to keep the system running well.<br/><br/>The key to doing any of this is plenty of advance notice.
thanks for getting to the heart of the matter. i'm sick of the mta blaming riders for delays. 
Greetings from Boston, where the MBTA is also struggling to modernize an antiquated system of signals, switches and rail.<br/><br/>The Green Line, which cuts through the heart of downtown Boston. has the highest ridership of any light rail in the country. It stretches from Cambridge, across the Charles River, and continues underground at North Station, home of the Boston Bruins and Celtics, until Kenmore Square, adjacent to Fenway Park. It then diverges to 4 separate lines that continue at street level, with the exception of 1 of those lines.<br/><br/>The Green Line also holds the distinction of being the oldest subway in the country, opening it's first section of tunnel in 1897. The original layout has not changed since then. The Boylston Street station claims another dubious honor, the tightest curved section of track for any subway. This leads to a sound all too familiar to Bostonians, the ear-wrenching squeel of metal wheels on metal rails.<br/><br/>The slow pendulum of transportation is finally swinging back towards mass transit after decades of construction focused on highways that bring workers from suburban Boston, around Interstates 95 and 495, to the downtown centers.<br/><br/>A new era of development has created even more demand for reliable, expedient public transit, but the state has failed to keep up with the times. An ever expanding college population offers a well educated workforce, but many of them refuse to pay for outrageously priced apartments if they cannot commute without a car.
London tube/underground system had the same trouble.  I recall a notice a few years ago at the bottom of an old escalator in one of the stations stating, 'We apologise for any delay but we have not attended to our railways system for 90 years and we feel it is time we should."
Shut a line down at 10PM till 6AM and add buses parallel to that route. 
The working class needs good jobs. The infrastructure across the whole US needs massive upgrading. Why are politicians talking about anything else?
Authorities, such as the MTA and the Port Authority, were specifically set up<br/>during the mid 20th century to shield politicians from making (or not making) unpopular political and economic decisions.  Governors Cuomo in NY and Christie in NJ can appoint members who profess to be independent and so can decide were to spend money and on which politically expedient project.  The Governors then have "plausible deniability" if it turns out to politically unpopular (such as fare and toll hikes). <br/><br/>Nobody gets to vote on who sits on these Authorities and therefore they are not answerable to the people who actually use and need them, only to the governors who appoint them.<br/>So, the much needed rail tunnel to NJ never gets built, the subway infrastructure languishes, the bridges and tunnels of the Bridge and Tunnel Authority wait until Sandy to get updated, etc.<br/>The elected officials of the City of New York, including the Mayor, have practically no power (other than to beg or shame) these boards controlled by the Governors.<br/>To truly bring the subway system into the 21st century,  it's time to overhaul its governance.
When I saw this, I wish we did not spend all the money and lives on meaningless wars.<br/><a href="https://www.facebook.com/search/str/China" title="https://www.facebook.com/search/str/China" target="_blank">https://www.facebook.com/search/str/China</a>'s+railroad+building+machines/keywords_top
All I can say is that, at least twice a week, I'm hit with 20-plus minute delays on my way to work. It's unacceptable for close to $3 per ride, and exceptionally frustrating. No fan of de Blasio, but if he wants to leave even a slightly positive legacy, he should do what he can with the time he has left in office to fix New York's broken public transportation. It's a nightmare.
Amazing to read that subway officials express their reluctance, with no apparent sense of irony, to close lines for desperately needed repair and upgrades because doing so will inconvenience riders, seemingly oblivious to the fact that if they don't, the inconvenience to the ridership will explode exponentially when the antiquated system finally fails. We just never seem to grasp that simple fact in this country when it comes to infrastructure: 'it'll be to expensive to fix it' is the standard refrain, yet the expense of not fixing it creeps up day by day... It's a form on insanity.
Very good article.<br/>Yes, changes to the signalling system are needed, but more importantly, changes to the protocol for getting the work done, and controls over the qualify of the work are also needed.  The work costs too much, and proceeds too slowly, and I believe much of this is because the system is controlled by the unions, and because the system is a monopoly.<br/>We should be proud that the system is as safe as it is, but I'd hate to think that we will need several accidents to move ahead more quickly with modernization.
Here's what needs to happen, and will never happen.<br/><br/>NYC needs to close for renovations. It needs to evacuate everyone to, say, Hawaii for a year and the subway system needs to be overhauled, the streets dug up and 100-year-old water pipes replaced instead of waiting for them to explode, the streets all need to be repaved, the bridges overhauled, the works.<br/><br/>NYC, and especially the transit system, is "this old house" and it won't be long before it doesn't work at all, like your iPhone from 2009 that finally boots up and the "sad face" appears. 
It's hard to believe that this discussion is even taking place. The subway is the lifeblood of the city. This should be done no questions asked.
Here is an idea. Give the task of upgrading one line to the MTA and the other to a private sector company like Bectel. Put in an incentive to finish the work early and have a third party inspect the work. Let's see which gets done faster, cheaper, and/or better. 
The antiquated signaling system is certainly a huge issue that needs to be addressed. But there are low-tech efforts that the MTA could be doing right now, today to improve riders' experience: using high pressure cleaning machines to clean subway platforms and stations, for example. <br/><br/>Even more basic: mops, buckets, sponges, hot water and bleach would go a long to improve the appearance and sanitation of stations and trains.<br/><br/>C'mon! You're not going to tell me that the MTA can't afford to buy those basic items and put people to work using them! And I mean at every station, not just the ones used by tourists and weekend shoppers.
I know nothing about the logistics of subway signals but why transponders every 500 feet? Sounds like the London system is antiquated as well. There are no transponders in the sky and yet we track every airplane that is flying across our globe. Put the transponders on the train. Additional and for redundancy, light sensors with wireless technology against the walls that track train locations and a computer that crunches the algorithm to make it all work. We are capable of developing driverless cars which seems a lot more complicated but cannot do the same with a vehicle that runs on rails and has less variables to deal with than an automobile in an urban setting? Am I missing something here? 
The last photo appears to illustrate part of the problem: There is one guy working and five guys standing around. Unfortunately, based on what I've seen of MTA workers around work sites, that appears to be the rule rather than the exception. 
I think that the restoration of service after Storm Sandy speaks volumes about the professionalism of the MTA staff.  Given the proper funding and out-of-service track time, they got the system up and running with admirable speed.<br/><br/>However, funding and out-of-service tracks are generally in short supply.  The federal government looks askance at public transportation, Albany doesn't regard the subway system as a priority, and the public thinks they pay too much already.  Add to that the hue and cry whenever tracks are taken out of service.  MTA becomes the favorite scapegoat, but there are many groups preventing them from efficiently doing their job<br/><br/>The system was brought back from it's deathbed in the 1970s only when we all recognized the crisis.  Hopefully, articles like this will raise awareness of the issues at hand.  It's time to stop finger pointing and get to work.
Incompetence is too kind a word to describe this situation. The MTA with a straight face says 30 more years won't be enough time. So let's do a little math. <br/><br/>30 years, as every homeowner knows, is 360 months. That's means about 1 station/month. The system has 665 miles of track. That's 2 mile/month or, yes, 100 yard/day. Doesn't that seem a little slow?  Like, what one man could do alone in one shift?  12 yards an hour? <br/><br/>I get that digging tunnels and building new stations is hard. So I'm not surprised the 2nd avenue subway came in at twice the budget in time and money. But a signaling system is not hard. There's oodles of robotics and computer experience on tap in New York. The MTA thinks it's hard because it's outside its ken, and covers up its ignorance with callous bureaucratic timelines. <br/><br/>If the MTA wanted to and cared to learn how, this project could be done in 5 years, entirely at night. Close one station a night for a week at a time. Get enough people on site to get the work done in that window. Have a separate crew on a coordinated schedule lay the wires and sensors on nearby track. Do 1 line at a time, end to end, so riders can see improvements associated with the disruption. <br/><br/>1 station/week instead of 1/month is 5 years instead of 30. The MTA itself says money's not the problem, and they're right. Commitment is the problem. No one there really cares.
We're always having service cuts and disruptions on the A Train.  This weekend there was NO service at all.  Was any work actually done?  Who knows.  We didn't see any work being done.  If the MTA is going to shut down a line that tens of thousands of people use - for an ENTIRE weekend - then the MTA needs to be working on that line - for the ENTIRE weekend.  Otherwise there is no justification for shutting it down at all.  I don't want to hear the excuse that the MTA doesn't have enough people.  HIRE SOME PEOPLE.  God knows there are enough of us out here who'd love to have the job.
To me, this article addresses the divide of the public and private spheres in American life, which are only magnified in New York and how the major parties, politicians and citizens have abandoned the notion of a public good that could drive prosperity and shared benefits.  In NYC, private facilities - e.g., private hospitals, private schools - are among the best, if not the best, in the world.  Public facilities, and spaces, especially those created since the end of World War II - Penn Station, the Port Authority, LaGuardia and JFK Airports, our public schools (with some notable exceptions) and our public transportation system - are a shameful embarrassment to the richest city on earth.<br/><br/>This is a matter of culture - refusing to invest in basic infrastructure that benefits the overwhelming majority, accepting the dismal public amenities as the best we can have, without upsetting the wealthy, whose incomes skyrocket while working and middle class incomes stagnate.  <br/><br/>New Yorkers are culturally habituated to and accept dirt, trash and substandard services and infrastructure as normal.  Compare our increasingly filthy, trash-strewn streets with those of London, Paris and other cities. (An outstanding exception is Central Park, a public-private partnership that demonstrates how we can be world class.)<br/><br/>Our decrepit subway infrastructure is a metaphor for our abandonment of the public sphere and public good as worthy of for our ambitions.
The problem is that with any public works project, those who control the money have no clue or care about projects that don't bolster their poll numbers, and the people paid to solve problems within the systems are always used to insane budgets that can allow a project to fester for years without progress.<br/><br/>Good, smart engineering can solve almost any problem.<br/><br/>Trains run on tracks in only one direction of travel on fixed rails, it's not such a hard system to manage compared to say air traffic control where there are 5 permutations of where an aircraft can move in space (6 for helicopters), and those aircraft are sometimes moving 20 times faster than a NYC subway car.<br/><br/>Given that trains run on tracks that are made of metal, with wheels that come in contact with them (along with a rail that supplies power), there are certainly methods in electrical engineering that can transmit digital data along these existing rails.  <br/><br/>Talking about how stuff like that works, bores the heck out of people, especially the ones who are just thinking about their next fundraising meal.<br/><br/>If it took less time to build a switching system in the 1930's than it takes to upgrade to modern equipment with all the improvements of things like personal computers (1970's tech) and fiber optics (1980's) and precise positioning systems (1990's) and lidar/sensor based driver assist (2000's).<br/><br/>Excuses should be challenged, but hey, I'll take a billion dollars to engineer nothing too.
So much to say. I will try to be brief.<br/><br/>I write to you from an apartment on Riverside Drive and 114th Street, visiting NYC after being away for 3 years and living here all my life previously.<br/><br/>Biggest surprise - a dollar now charged for a Metro card. <br/><br/>Imagine attending a show and being charged not just for the ticket, but for the paper it's printed on. Or this being 1970 and a dollar charge for the token. <br/><br/>Roll over, Fiorello LaGuardia! <br/><br/>Where is this money going, I wonder?
If they charged 1930s fares...this would almost make sense. 
It is impossible to imagine any business in New York running on this type of absurdly antiquated technology.  And were the subways regulated by government, instead of being run by it, they would have been forced to modernize decades ago for obvious safety reasons.<br/><br/>I read several bogus explanations for why this has been allowed to happen.  I didn't see any mention of the swollen salaries and pensions of union employees and the unsustainable chunk of the MTA's revenue that they consume. The simple explanation is that government is not capable of running a capital-intensive endeavor like the subway system.  The solution is simple:  sell off the subway and allow it to be properly capitalized so that the infrastructure can be upgraded and maintained into the future.<br/><br/>But of course New Yorkers will never allow that to happen.  
The quality of the subway is a major contributor to the quality of life in the city.  Reliability is important, but so are head times.  During non-peak times, trains seem to run far less frequently than they used to, especially at night and on weekends.  In neighborhoods on the periphery of the city, they're starting to drop the shuttle buses that replace the train service during construction.<br/><br/>The Times could play a big role in helping us push back by shining more light on the situation.  The phase 2 of the Second Avenue Subway project is supposed to cost $6 billion.  A detailed deep dive into where that money actually goes, and how our costs compare to the costs in other cities would be invaluable.<br/><br/>And so would high profile reporting that simply tracks changes in service on a macro level.  I believe that head times have been increasing a lot, but I don't really know that to be true.  Does anyone outside of the MTA track head times?  How are decisions about such things made?  How much does the MTA save if it shaves a run off of the 6 line every hour during the afternoon over the weekend?  How does the MTA balance off the day to day operation of the system vs. long term improvements?
Very tired of the constant delays. N/W service has tanked completely.
The New York subway system is one of the epic failures of New York. While the city is as overdeveloped as real estate and plum tax abatements to developers can make it, its infrastructure is never much more than an afterthought. Another example of a mentality where government partners with corporations over the essential needs of their citizens. The bus system is so overburdened as to leave passengers not just at rush hour nearly lifted off the ground by the sheer force of the number of riders. The schedule leaves one waiting often 15 and 20 minutes between buses in peak hours on peak routes.<br/>Living in this city for nearly 40 years, I have been mainly appalled at the third rate service New Yorkers suffer for living here and paying high taxes. Travel to any world class city and the much higher standard in transit systems is downright shocking. The MTA can't even manage a route map in a subway train. Or a public announcement system that can be heard and understood on more than 50% of the trains. Or subway stations that aren't often though not always filthy. This is not just a matter of failing to modernize with the times. It is a colossal failure of will.<br/>When I return from London and the pleasure of riding its Tube and buses, I don't know why I live here.  
Here in Toronto we are facing a smaller version of the same problem.  The Toronto Transit Commission is replacing the original signal system that was installed in the 1950s. To do so, it closes sections of the system for a weekend at a time. They run shuttle busses between the affected stations. Is it a pain? Sure, but you can tell progress is being made as the closures move to different area of the system.<br/><br/>The article indicates that the MTA is reluctant to close sections of track because it inconveniences passengers. But by not changing the system efficiently they inconvenience passengers every single day. It’s the old, do you want to pay now, or do you want to pay later?<br/><br/>The MTA should have the nerve and brains to tackle the problem head on. Plan the track closing for a weekend or a week. Advertise the upcoming closing widely. Commander a section of the street above ground and block a lane to all but bus traffic for the length of the closure. Put surface route busses in service on that dedicated bus lane to replace the lost subway service. Get multiple crews working underground 24-hours a day to finish that section. <br/><br/>Then do it again. You can have short-term pain or long-term pain, but solving the problem will never, ever be pain free.
6 million rides a day...The state of Alaska has 725,000 residents.  So we could put the entire state of Alaska, Wyoming, Vermont, or Maine on the subway and not even notice.<br/>To Republicans and Ayn Rand enthusiasts, the subway does not have to turn a profit.  It has to be reliable so everyone can make it to the appointments on time and the economy humms along. More taxes, more revenue everyone wins.<br/>Imagine if we gave the MTA the same funding as the Bridge to Nowhere.  Or, the entire state of Alaska!  
the focus on signal modernization needs to be on the trunk lines in Manhattan next and their tunnels to the outer boros, with painful night and weekend closures on either or both the local and express tracks of the 8th ave, 7th ave, 6th ave, Broadway, and Lexington Ave trunk lines.<br/><br/>The insight gained from working on these lines can be used to do the trunk of the Queens Bvld line as well as the THREE tunnels (63rd, 60th, 53rd) that serve it. After that, move on to the remaining line segments with multiple services: Eastern Pkwy (2345), Brighton (BQ), Fulton (AC), 4th Ave (DNR), Culver (FG), Jamaica (JMZ) lines in Brooklyn; Jerome Ave (4), White Plains Road (25), Pelham (6), and Concourse (BD) in the Bronx; the 23 in Manhattan; and the NW in Queens. Then, the single-service ends of lines: the A, C, F, G J, M, N, and R trains in Brooklyn, the 2 and 5 in the Bronx, the E, F, G, M in Queens; and the 1, A, C in Manhattan.<br/><br/>This is a huge amount of work, but there's no point in starting (for example) working on the 6th ave line with the end of the M in Middle Village! The trunk lines have to be first, as they need the highest capacity. The upgrades can radiate out from there. This has the added benefit of relying on the redundancy of the Manhattan lines to alleviate the pain. With real investments in physically separated bus lanes on the streets and bridges in the densest parts of town and five-boro bike infrastructure, NYC could transform itself into a city that doesn't need cars.
I wonder if this writer and the traveling public at large understand the cost of modernization the subway's signaling system ?<br/>Especially, for a public utility which normally lives hand to mouth money wise.<br/>Such an undertaking which require large infusions of taxpayers' cash and riders' patience. Modernization of the signaling plant is not like installing a new television, where you go to the store and put the new one in your home.<br/>A new signal system would take years to design, test, implement, test again, work out the bugs, and train personnel on its use before it is operational.<br/>The new system would take a lot of getting use to resulting in train delays and altering of schedules and the other tasks associated with such a revision.
I spent a month in Delhi this spring, during which time I had the opportunity to make extensive use of its subway system. It beats ours in every dimension. If the MTA hasn't done it already, it should send a team to Delhi to see how a really good system works. 
Another example of poor government. Costs are out of control while services languish. Most weekends there is limited train service to lower Manhattan because of alleged "track work" -- though the only visible track work is a few workers dawdling about. 
15 years ago met some rail engineers that worked world-wide on various projects, and told me that the MTA administrators were too cheap on modernizing their system with newer and better technologies, and insisted in keeping the old signal system in.  It was a financial boon to old companies that still kept inventory of old components, and to old engineers that were doing the same jobs as decades before.  Now,, I see this on the front page.  Great.
There will come a day when all of our commuting possibilities will come to a stand still. Gridlock on the roads and subway disruptions. Wait a minute, that day is EVERYDAY! What are we waiting for? Christmas 2035? Better get busy, now.<br/>For it usually takes 10 years to decide whether or not to do something and get the permits, then the contract bids, etc. This process of course should have started at least 20 years ago. What a bunch of losers we are. Our country has truly ended up in the trash bin of history, right where it belongs.<br/>We don't even have trains to most of our airports in this country. We are pathetic. Too many people, all trying to clamour aboard our archaic infrastructure. Can you imagine what it will be like in another 25 years? 
Welcome to US civic engineering.  Here in Boston they are extending a subway line 4-5 miles, on land that already is a RR right of way, so it's graded, etc, appropriately.  it will take 10 years of construction work ... that is, after all the court fights and legal hoohaa and permitting and so on and so forth -- 10 years of hardhats wielding tools.  And at a cost expected to be about $3B,   This comes to about 800 days/mile and $10k/inch.<br/><br/>The Swiss just opened the Gotthard Base Tunnel ... two rail tunnels through granite under the alps.  It is over 35 miles long, took 17 years to build and cost $12B. Or about 177 days/mile and about $5400/inch.<br/><br/>Putting some boxes along/under existing track and wiring them together will probably take until the third coming and cost the aggregate GDP of the Western Hemisphere.<br/><br/>And Trump's famed infrastructure plan ... that will employ one guy, half time, starting at about the time the universe reaches maximum entropy.
I have lived in both London and Signapore. Our infrastructure is indeed an embaresment. Not only do London trains come every couple of minutes, but the tracks are spotless. People wouldn't have to run and hold the doors if they knew a train was right behind the current one. Singapore is a whole other level of nice, but I won't get into that. What I will say is hat they have doors at the platform that prevent people from falling on the tracks. As the MTA advertises, about 50 people a year die from being hit by a train...that's all preventable with these doors. NY building code stipulates that such change in elevation requires a guard rail, regardless of a 100 ton machine coming at you.
New York subway system is equivalent to a 3rd world country. Dirty, noisy, unsafe....
There once was an archaic subway<br/>One well past its glorious heyday<br/>In need of some money<br/>So much it ain’t funny<br/>To keep the city’s collapse at bay
Where'd the money go???
And yet since I moved to NYC in 1995 the cost of a ride has doubled.  In twenty years   And the $15 price of coming into Manhattan over a bridge is up there in the stratosphere beyond outrageous--especially for people who live here and use those bridges every...single...day.    I know there are mystical, magical forces at play here which I can never understand.  But to the layman, these astonishing, backbreaking, outlandish increases seem jaw-droppingly unfair, especially in light of our ability to physically--and oh so lamentably--compare our NYC mass transit experiences with those in other states and countries.  Wherein does the vast incompetence lie? 
"We are being held by the dispatcher.  We apologize for any inconvenience this may cause you."
How many of these commuters support Republican members of Congress who don't give a rat's behind about NYC's mass transit system? ie. guys like Donovan dutifully support their majority caucus.
So sick of government wasting all our money with nothing to show for it. Our subways are an embarrassment. Our airports, embarrassment. Our roads, embarrassment. Yet, we give the state - (Cuomo &amp; NY Democrats!) billions for the MTA, along with $120/month, along with outrageous tolls on bridges - $17 for the Verrazano?! It's funny, it almost seems as if our government - whether Dem or Rep - has zero interest in returning to the people, that work hard to give them their hard earned money, any sort of goods or services to make a civilized society.
This is one of the main reasons why people who agree that changes like single payer health insurance is a good idea EXCEPT if it's run by the government!! The government ROUTINELY fouls things up. The list of reasons are too long to go into here, but we all know most of them already. <br/><br/>Nobody of substance is ever held personally responsible for malfeasance. The blame is usually laid at the feet of some poor working stiff or low level manager with little power to make things right. <br/><br/>Half a century to fix signals. Why bother. By that time everyone will be traveling by personal drone and the subways will be left to generations of rats that haven't made it their home already.
As a native New Yorker I mourn the lack of progress in our infrastructure. We have so much talent, tech savvy and brawn in our nation and yet year after decade after decade we have poured trillions into weaponry. A product that makes us less safe as we build more of it and one that has no purpose but destroy and to enrich the few. When are we going to build again?  I can only hope for an awakening. We should have modern trains. New York transit needs an overhaul (LA and SF too). Bullet rail, monorail, and a subway for the premiere city of the world that would be on par with the great subway systems of the world. And subway stations that are modernized as well. Our youth has the energy and technical brilliance and desire to do this kind of work. Where are the New Deal leaders?
Great article, and it hit on the biggest problem we face: Cost. I'd love to see a whole other article about why our infrastructure costs are up to 4 times as much as London, Paris or Tokyo. All three of those examples are in far older cities than New York and exist in a similar union-work style labor environment. <br/><br/>Why do our upgrades, equipment and big projects have far larger price tags than theirs? Seems like we're only getting 1/4 of the value.
"Don't fix what aint broke" - the guiding mantra for all infrastructure in New York.   It's a philosophy, a worldview.  At bottom it's a gamble on what you can get away with, and a certain pride in knowing the moves, the alternative paths.  It is also fundamentally irrational.  A bad gamble.   People whine about service interruptions needed to upgrade the subway system, but when the inevitable occurs - namely major system failure - the service will be interrupted for sure, and in a bigger way.   But I suppose New Yorkers are OK with that - at least it would be a dramatic shared experience, not some shadowy background process.
Like others have said, easier to pay for cosmetic fixes, new stations, better lighting, new escalators, than invest in the unseen infrastructure. Looking at the photos reminds me of something from Victorian era. I am surprised it has lasted this long without some major catastrophe. MTA will need to make commuters unhappy with reasonable closures and not look for more excuses to delay further.<br/><br/>One good thing - the system is so antiquated, probably immune to computer hackers.
A key problem is that Gov. Cuomo defines "economic development" as something for which he can issue a press release and personally decide, without meaningful oversight, where to spend the billions (yes billions). Since signal work doesn't meet these criteria, it doesn't get properly funded or managed, despite the subway system being the linchpin our our local economy.<br/>And our state legislature rolls over for him. 
The NYC subway system will collapse under the increase of ridership with few running trains while lines are being upgraded.  This is the consequence of small government thinking and indifference to the infrastructure of public transportation in the US.  The US is at least 40 years behind the rest of the modern world and will never catch up.
All I know is that for many years the NYC subway has had late night and weekend changes and cancellations of service due to maintenance work.  I keep asking myself how is it possible that this never ends, that the project is never completed.
Maybe the MTA's main reason for not shutting down subway lines is not a concern for its reputation/costumer satisfaction but rather a belief that the alternative methods of transit (buses, etc) would be utterly unable to meet the demand. 
My first experience with MTA staff on the subway, many years ago, was when I swiped a card and was told "see agent." The agent in the booth was a heavy set woman in her 50's who had just painted her nails and was fanning them to dry them. She told us "You gonna have to wait until my nails is dry before I take a look at that." Since then I've seen evidence of this culture of incompetence and laziness all over the subway, every single day of the week, and it terrifies me to think how much of our revenue is wasted on the support of people like this. 
Thankfully engineers decades ago at least designed and built reliable systems. Without that the whole mess would have collapsed by now as we dally, make unfulfilled promises and pay ever more in salaries and benefits to the workers and administrators while improving nothing.
Upgrading the current system should be covered under everyday maintaining and not be paid for with more debt. Expanding the overcrowded system should be the number capital priority since constructing new lines takes years of time planning and review. New York City should be looking at adding 80 miles of new lines, mostly in underserved outer boroughs over the next 20 years. Los Angeles has approved $120 billion in rail expansion over the next 40 years. We can exceed that figure with a modest commuter tax.
I just read a web story talking about the top 20 cities of public transportation in the US.  NY city is the number one in the country.  If NY is that bad, I cannot image how bad the public transportation system of the bottom 20 cities in the country.  If our excuse of doing nothing in the public transportation is because of lack of money, I would totally reject that explanation.  We spend so much money to rebuild other countries and we do not have money for our own country is an inexcusable.  Our priority is totally wrong.
The federal government should have invested in infrastructure. but the last Republican to do that was Eisenhower, who warned about the military industrial complex. Now, our country is always focused on war and munitions.  Reagan and the Bushes redistributed the wealth of the nation to a few, killing off the middle class. This is where we are.
The MTA is a patronage machine for the NY governor (regardless of political party). It needs to be removed from the control by the state and made politically independent. The MTA is a down-state issue - no one north of Newburgh cares about the LIRR, the subway, or Metro North. Heck, ask anyone in Syracuse, Rochester or Buffalo about the MTA and you will get a blank stare.<br/><br/>Once the MTA is out from under the governor's control, it can negotiate with the legislature for funding, issue its own debt and be responsive to the needs of its customers.
If I can write an app for my iPhone to have Automatic Train Control for my model trains, I thick spending billion in NYC for "signals" is an outrage. NYC subways should have followed SAN Francisco 's Bart years ago in automating "signaling"<br/>With airplanes that fly themselves and cars that drive themselves, it is way past time to have trains that can follow tracks by themselves. NYC is such a wonderful museum.
If the rich had to rely on the subway, the system would be funded and fixed. 
If you think back to the 1980's, there were lengthy delays on the E and F lines due to track inspections, faulty track, etc. The MTA can't catch up with needed repairs to station walls/ceilings that spew heaven knows what, elevators/escalators in disrepair, etc. Agencies must stay on top of maintenance from the get go, otherwise the system breaks down. 
Nearly a hundred years ago, the country that built the tallest buildings in the world out of steel and concrete when the rest of the world had a five story view. We built the Hoover Dam, moving earth and rerouting nature during The Depression in record speed. We invented the Internet. Who would've thought updating a train system was beyond our abilities. The entire debacle, reeks of greed and laziness.
I would recommend policies the left leaning New Yorkers would recommend for the rest of the country - tax and spend residents of New York state to pay for it, regardless of the waste and inefficiencies.  And lower transit fares even lower so more people can afford it; in fact just make it free - free transportation should be a right.  And the unions, left leaning New Yorkers love the unions - leave them alone and let them make a lot of money at your expense.      
American public transport systems are woeful !  The car rules.  It is time for American state and federal governments to invest in public transport. Long over due - China, France, Spain, Japan - are all passing America out.
I really hope Governor Cuomo is reading this over his morning coffee right now. The cost of CBTC is minuscule compared to the cost of not doing it (when you realize that every signal malfunction is a multi-million $ hit to NY's economy), and with an engaged governor we could do it system-wide in 5 years instead of 50.
I have lived on the 7 line for well over 10 years now.  During this time, every weekend, in the Winter and Spring, there is shutdown to do signals work and other work which the MTA fails to explain to the riding public.  I have not noticed any improvements in service during this time.  Indeed, I find the timing of work highly suspect: magically, all work is complete as soon as baseball season begins, when all the white people from Manhattan come ride the 7 train to watch the mets.
I ride the A train a lot.  At the 181st. Washington Heights stop there is an elevator that goes from the tracks up to Fort Washington.  Sometimes there is an MTA worker in their orange vest and headphones to push the button to take you up or down.  Sometimes we are stuck with this laborious duty ourselves.<br/>I always wonder what the operator that hits that one choice button gets an hour to do that job.<br/>totally mind boggling.
At least the current system is safe from computer hackers!    
Great article! This is the single most important way to increase capacity in our subways. We need to get better at upgrading these systems to keep up with the enormous growth of our ridership.<br/>Here's a nice video that explains this technology:<br/><a href="https://vimeo.com/93485551" title="https://vimeo.com/93485551" target="_blank">https://vimeo.com/93485551</a>
This is definitely an agency that has grossly mismanaged the development of infrastructure. It's crazy in this day and age that the entire system has not been rebuilt. They've been at it for 30 years with little to show. I rode the 7 train in the 1990's and it is no better today. Where did the money go? I suspect it went to salaries and pension benefits. We need a complete overhaul of the salary and pensions for civil employees. In the private sector there are almost no pensions left (except for those who joined 25-30 years ago). Why are there pensions in the public sector? Get a 401K and join the rest of us miserables. Pat
I love, love, love riding the subway. (Hey. We don't have one here in NC.) It is like getting in a time machine with some of the most interesting people in the world. It's a wonder of the modern world. But, yes.  Y'all do need to love up on it a bit. 
The lead picture for this article is both terrifying and hilarious. Mostly the former. <br/><br/>Looks like someone needs an audit! What % of our tax dollars and ride payments go to salaries and what goes to capital improvements? <br/><br/>Can the Mayor or the Governor make some political hay out of this? Seize the day, dudes.
Public safety and infrastructure may not be glamorous as hot-button issues like border walls, but they touch upon our lives in a fundamental, everyday way. How transit authority workers manage to keep a moribund system functioning with as few problems as they do is a testament to their professionalism (or luck..,). Is it going to take a catastrophic failure to change attitudes and demand a rapid overhaul? <br/><br/>The only thing we lack is motivation.
6 million rides per weekday is 3 million round trips about 1 round trip for every 100 people in the country.  Yet, the MTA, receives far less than 1% of the country's budget on transportation.  It is better transportation than electric cars because there is no traffic congestion and it is much greener *per passenger* than electric cars which frequently are charged from electric power derived from carbon-based greenhouse gas fuels such as coal and gas.<br/><br/>Yet, Gov. Cuomo seems to have found $10 billion for LaGuardia and the Feds and States managed to have rebuilt 3 new bridges.
So lets do what we need to do: back a Brinks truck up, hire the number 2 guy from London, and fix the problem. And lets hire the guy from London ASAP, before we completely stop granting visas to foreigners.  JFK challenged us to put a man on the moon within a decade, can't Cuomo challenge the MTA to put a person from Smith &amp; 9th street to Bryant Park in less than 30 minutes? 
The problems are all UNION problems caused by the rampent stupidity and carelessness of UNION workers.
If you have a leaky roof, you don't spend money on building an annex to your home first.  Upgrade the signals before spending billions on subway extensions and have the City contribute more funding to the subways instead of wasting it on a light rail system.
So what have they been doing with the fare income all these years?
The root of the problem here is that "nothing can ever be done on schedule and budget in New York City," particularly underground.  Everything costs about 3 times as much in NYC as it does in other major, crowded cities in the world: London, Tokyo, Paris etc.<br/><br/>A second problem that the city isn't facing is that the subway network was built to do one thing: move commuters in and out of Manhattan.  That just cannot continue to be the only transit there is.  The daytime density of Manhattan cannot keep increasing, by moving people in from farther and farther away ... taking ever longer to do so.  NYC is already becoming decentralized -- Brooklyn is starting to look like Manhattan and Queens will be next.  But there's no transit for anything but Manhattan. 
There is no way to replace aging infrastructure of any kind in a busy metropolitan area without creating disruption.  That's true whether we're talking about subway or train tracks, roadways, bridges, or airports.  The reality, though, is that it has to be done.  As a nation, we have been living off of infrastructure investments made decades ago, adding a bit here, doing some patchwork there, and hoping for the best.  Any new projects undertaken routinely run well over schedule and beyond budget. <br/><br/>It is both sad and frustrating that we, as a nation, seem to lack the will and the competence to adequately fund and manage big public works projects. Private industry is far more reliant on public infrastructure than we like to admit. Our economy as a whole will be constrained if we can't move people and goods more reliably and efficiently.  Other countries are passing us by in the area of infrastructure. We will eventually pay the price for this neglect.
What kind of Fiduciary responsibility do elected officials have with maintaining current government assets?<br/><br/>I would think there is some responsibility, funding pension plans for workers comes to mind and keeping roads and trains owned by the government entity safe. <br/><br/>Why have voters allowed elected officials to get away with these lapses?<br/><br/>Incredible......I mean Trillions will have to be spent to fix things that prior elected officials ignored or took advantage of by not funding in past years
This is typical of our American culture; build something nice but be too cheap to do any regular maintenance or upgrades. It's like we have attention deficit as a country.<br/><br/>Anything with rails is old-fashioned and not very sexy. It doesn't have to be that way. 
As I this, I am in a rush hour A train with no PA announcement of stations. Nothing.
As soon as the photographer left, they put the Mets game on those two TVs...
Thomas Prendergast should not be saying, "We have to be able to manage it better" as he does in another NYTimes article (Jan 24, 2017). HE should have been managing it better. <br/><br/>I'd ordinarily be sympathetic to the complex challenges of upgrading old infrastructure. But not for the MTA. I spoke with a young, capable, tech-smart acquaintance who was working for the MTA a few years ago. The stories I heard about a management team unfamiliar with current technology - taking RFPs from contractors offering 10x a reasonable project cost (to hundreds of millions of dollars) for laughably outdated solutions - defied belief. The MTA doesn't need decades and billions of additional dollars to upgrade signal programs. It needs 10 years to tear down and rebuild its own organization. 
The idea of a project to install "modern" equipment to replace equipment that is outdated, in which the modern equipment was modern and current at the start of the project, which in this case was 2005, and to continue that project using the same equipment till at least 2045 is beyond ridiculous.<br/>And this is because by the time 2045 comes around modern and current switches and signals on trains will be such that the trains can operate on their own without a motorman.<br/>So if the NY subway will still be installing equipment that dated to 2005 in the year 2045 it would be the laughing stock of the world.
While we're complaining (and I do my share) about delays and the slow pace of improvements, let's take a moment to admire a signal system that has worked as well as it has for *thirty years* longer than its intended life.  Surely, block signals are not as good as computerized control of every train, but keeping at least two red signals between trains has done a good job of preventing collisions, which would surely have involved fatalities.  And look at the photos of the old equipment: it was the best available at the time, and it is a prime example of robust technology!
Analog technology is perfectly serviceable for low-tech applications like running a subway, and it's simple and durable. Is installing underground microchips really a big factor in service quality?
When my wife and I were in London, we made extensive use of the Tube.  While I’m sure they have their own issues, in our experience it was clean and ran regularly.  I’m often reminded of one such trip when we were standing next to an information phone while waiting for a train.  Another rider walked up to the phone to make a call, I remember elbowing my wife and smirking as if to say, “Is this guy kidding me?  No way that thing works.”  Sure enough someone on the other line picked up, he reported that an escalator was out of order and went on with his day.  Good luck getting that kind of service in NYC.
Its great to see a story about the shocking underfunding of NYC transportation instead of more hyperventilating about a tweet of the President's.  Hold the Governor and the state legislators feet to the fire about NYC transportation, New York Times!  
I started doing the morning-evening commute to work in the mid 70's. One thing I definitely remember is that the "trains are moving slow due to a sick passenger on the train in front of us" didn't start until the 80's and always in the morning, seems like it was there way of saying the trains are just slow this morning. Which brings up another question, why is it the morning rush that's hit with the majority of slow downs, it does happen in the evening rush but ninety percent more so in the morning. The trains run 24/7, so what is it about the morning that just doesn't work out for the NYC Transit?
I am from one of the original 13 states, of which only 8 did not incur damage during the Civil War of the 1860's.  That was the time when the Victoria Line was built in London, Great Britain according to the article.<br/><br/>To the tribute to the US builders of when the NYC subway was built, the walls at 34th Street look much better than they do in the London picture in the article.<br/><br/>Of the 8 States of the original 13 state in the USA, how many can boast a powering of the lines by modern day electric power?  What the NYC subway system really needs is a wind farm off the Atlantic Coast for climate control.  Endless supply of power without the need for destroying the environment.
No money for US infrastructure but the President Donald Trump and the Republican Party has more money, taxpayer money, for the US Military?
Could you do a segment on how signal callers work?
The main problem with the current signal system in the subway, is that much of the equipment is decades beyond its life span, and so it is prone to breaking down, which results in delays.<br/>However the solution the MTA is using to fix this problem is not to simply replace the equipment so that it doesn't break down. The MTA plans to completely change the whole signaling system in the subways. This despite the fact that putting in new signaling requires major long term shutdowns of train lines, it also requires new train cars and is way more expensive than simply replacing the old equipment.<br/>In addition when dealing with a problem such as delays, a plan to have it fixed by 2045 at the earliest, which means the problem will be going on for at least another 28 years, is no plan at all.<br/>Therefore a question that must be addressed is what exactly will be gained by going this route of installing this new signaling system in the subway.<br/>The sole benefit of a modern signaling system is that trains can run closer to each other. A line on the London Tube with its new signal system can run 36 trains an hour, as opposed to the NY subway which can run 29 trains an hour on a single line. However even with the current system the only line that runs that many trains is the Lexington Ave line during rush hour. No other line runs that many trains an hour.<br/>And since the sole benefit of this decades long project will be an extra 7 trains an hour on a single line, it serves no purpose at all.
Even as a kid in the late '60s I knew the NYC subway system was antiquated because our Canadian friends told us about their system, where the wheels were made of rubber. That was 50 years ago!
Several years ago - actually, probabl at least 20 - there wasa story about Japanese engineers visiting whatever serves as  Subway CentCom and getting c about the archaic system.  NYC political leaders and their highly paid appointees at MTA are responsible -  but are never held responsible -  for the lack or forward thinking, planning, updating and maintenance. It seems as if the only people who have to sacrifice anything are the riders.
Seems this discussion is incomplete without autonomous trains. Self-driving cars and trucks seem all the media rage, why not trains? While upgrading the system, upgrade the whole thing, or, even if there's too much pressure from Labor, at least make it possible. Start with the Times Square Shuttle. Why are there still human operators? How is that line fundamentally different from, say, the JFK AirTrain, except for Labor pressure? Labor is the single largest MTA expense...and cause of accidents.
I would be thrilled with some simple maintenance such as cleaning.  The West Fourth Station is an abomination of filth.   Leaving this to individuals performing community service is not a solution.  This is an embarrassment before the world.
It is always easier to want to buy new furniture than it is to insulate your home. Invisible improvements aren't satisfying. <br/><br/>New subway station art or fantastic new subway stations make people happier than upgrading the infrastructure.  At least they are happier until the old 30's infrastructure fails and then they start complaining.  We've been distracted too long about cosmetic things and need to improve the unseen fundamentals. It is going to cost big but hopefully the improved safety and train running times will be enough to make people happy.  Haha.
Look at all the flashing red and green lights… You are in a candy store (at least I am)
I worked for the MTA in the 80's if I worked more then 4 hours a day it was a bad day. They have had Capital Improvement Programs for decades, the system is so poorly managed it is a wonder it works at all. They have squandered billions. The most efficient person I met was the lady who took my ID/Pass when I resigned, it took 30 minutes. There was no exit interview, but I told her if anyone asks I was grateful for the job. She replied, "No one will ask."
Do it. In the summertime. I'll take the bus for a coupla weeks.
Let's let President Trump "build it, build it fabulously, it will be tremendous, and get N.J.  residents to pay for it...once Gov. Christie is out of office!
Thanks for reminding me-- it's Monday. What "signal problems," "earlier incidents," and "traffic ahead" situations will we encounter on our morning commute? Mondays are usually the worst these days. Any ideas why?
The problem arises from not differentiating between a 'cost' and an 'investment.'
I'm stuck (but not surprised) but the picture of a worker installing the upgraded equipment as another watches in the background with his hand in his pockets. Much like our creaky, groaning T service in Boston, I wonder what percentage of these delays are pure logistics, and what percentage is based on a workforce that has virtually no accountability.
The MTA is one of those NY State agencies that has lots of power, money and little oversight.  We've funded lots of things for the MTA and the money is wasted on union salaries and benefits, and middle managers making $200,000 a year with rich benefits, and a history of hiring politically connected people and rewarding politicians' friends with rich consulting contracts.<br/><br/>In the meantime, it's going to be 7 YEARS before they start repairs on the L-train tunnel, and still tell us that they are "upgrading" signals to have more trains on the tracks.<br/><br/>We need to pressure our Community Boards, our Council members, our Mayor, our Congressmen and Senators to AUDIT and reform the MTA.  No more excuses from them on why they can't afford to do their JOB with the BILLIONS they control and collect from all travelers.<br/><br/>No more excuses from the politicians.  Not everyone can use bikes, and not everyone can afford Uber, taxis or driving.  We need real investment in PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION, primarily subways.
That photo of the worker installing switch equipment is a good illustration of the inefficiency of the system: one worker working, one worker leaning against a post watching.
You're just here to vent but you have no knowledge of this area. You're relying on some imperfect description of a NY Times reporter to inform you about what might be wrong with new signaling technology. I can assure you that the engineers who design these systems know 1000x more than you do about the range of technologies available. None of them would even think for a second of involving GPS in a subway signaling system. 
If you've actually been riding New York subways for 75 years, then you were around when it was the first to go to centralized control on part of the Lexington Ave corridor in 1956. And you rode it when they installed a computerized overlay monitoring the near entirety of Queens in 1998. And you rode it when they commissioned the first solid state interlocking in the United States at Bergen St on the F. Meanwhile, in all the "old" signal rooms, the relays were replaced every 30 years or so, which is the lifespan of a relay (why replace them sooner?). How does that square with "these signals haven't been changed since I first rode them ... almost 75 years ago"?
Well said! Upgrades seem less expensive and more doable in a reasonable time frame then a complete replacement.
That is ridiculous.  The subways are WAY better off now than in 1975.  The mere fact it's so crowded is proof of that.  In 1975 people were fleeing the city and those who stayed only rode the subway if they had no choice.
London, Paris, Moscow, Tokyo, and Beijing, they all do not offer ridiculous compensation packages to the rank and file. That is the principal difference between these systems. 
When I was in London a couple of months ago, maybe five or so years since my last visit and I don't know how long since I rode the tube -- I was impressed by how short my waits for the train were, and I rode it quite a lot. I have also been impressed with all the additions to the London service over the last 15 or 20 years.
Yeah when Her Majesty Margaret Thatcher gutted the trade unions she made the Tube great again.
You are incorrect. Our transit workers are, on the whole, hard-working and capable. I live here and I have ridden the Subways all my life. I also know many Transit workers. Besides working around the clock to keep things running, transit workers are frequently injured or killed on the job through no fault of their own. They are dedicated workers and the system would not run even as well as it does without them. By the way I am not a Transit worker.The problems with the system are due to lack of will and lack of funding by politicians from both parties. They prefer to give tax breaks to corporations rather than put money into Transit. This is just another anti Union rant by someone living thousands of miles away. No thanks.
They are generally decent people, like anybody else, but they are way overcompensated and they all know it. You don't know any transit workers but I have known hundreds, maybe thousands.
No, it's all the fault of those greedy, lazy, corrupt transit workers. Don't you know anything?
Transit workers often don't have facilities to take their breaks in. Where are they supposed to go?<br/> Working on the roadbed of the subway is nothing like working in a restaurant. A crane might be needed for an hour on Saturday morning and an hour on Sunday night. Should the crane operator(s) look busy between then?
Why fight traffic to go to Boston when Amazon can deliver just about anything that you might possibly want in two days maximum?
That's not enough time.  <br/><br/>Tax the black market economy including illegal undocumented workers who get paid in cash.  <br/><br/>NYC//MTA//NYS is starving for $$ but give a free ride to folks who work off-the-books.  NYC provide these folks with Medicaid, Food Stamps, Education, etc.<br/><br/>I'm not saying it's wrong but come on - enough is enough.  
1) You can't just replace train operators with robots, for several reasons. The biggest one being that your proposal is technologically unfeasible, as there's no infrastructure in place for it. And even a CBTC train like the L still requires a human operator at the controls, both for legal reasons, and because the train can't tell when there's a person on the roadbed and needs to stop.<br/>2) Sounds like a great way to waste a whole lot of white paint. It's really, really filthy down there; all that white would be black in weeks.<br/>3) Frankly, all stations should have elevator access. But if you thought the 2nd Ave Subway was expensive, wait until you see what it'd cost to build and maintain system-wide handicap accessibility. 
First, lets replace the Governor with a robot!
Study up on BY FAR the world's most advanced rail system - Japan. You cannot believe what they deal with on a routine basis, their track system requires that they be so amazingly efficient at their timetables and design because they have to keep intertwining high speed and local trains without any collision. All day every day.<br/><br/>And amazingly, they found that they HAVE to use humans. Computers are just not smart enough, they would not be able to respond and adjust in any where near the proficiency of a person.
CityLab does a better job than NYT on these issues. You are correct in saying that MTA/NYCT lacks in-house expertise to complete these projects. The Siemens/NYCT relationship is not as incestuous as you would think. NYCT made a mistake on the A-division control center system and Siemens won a $2.5M lawsuit against them for being idiots. 
Managing director of London Underground made, in USD, $0.5M/year in the mid 2000s. That's about 200% what his counterpart in NYC Transit made. 
So when a Democrat is in office 100 days and the repairs don't materialize - you get upset?
Boston's transit system is genuinely run by idiots.
And you base this skepticism on what data?
No transit system in the world operates at a profit!
Janet C: "Sure you don't want to upset your passengers but as old as the switching system is, what happens if it completely fails. Then you'll have a whole line shut down for who knows how long instead of a station of two for weekends to get the work done."<br/><br/>Janet's right - except that when a switching or signal system fails completely and the line has to be shut down, riders and politicians will accept it (however grudgingly). Try shutting down a line temporarily to fix something before it breaks, and riders and politicians will insist that there's got to be some other way to fix it that will both happen quickly and not inconvenience them.
running things usually takes money, whether in fhe form higher fares or subsidies. Barring these, we need to used to less functional services. Plus the US is plagued by typically US problems that make things more expensive and time consuming than usual (i.e., affirmative action, "minority" rights in contracting, etc.). 
"Progressives" like Rudy Guiliani (1994-2001), or Michael Bloomberg (2002-2013)? That's two full decades under *Republican* mayors. Try using some actual facts for a change.<br/><br/>And if the current "administration" of his Royal Orange-ness has shown quite clearly, government is *NOT* as simple or as easy as running a business. Obviously, his followers are even slower than he is.
Their job is tough, indeed! But, what about being, especially a Public School teacher, in the outer Boroughs, where a polyglot of languages have sprung up, certainly in the last twenty years, but you are still required to have your charges cinch your curriculum and exam, whether in your English class, or a discipline where English is used?! Now, that's really tough!!!
Or maybe, just maybe, those workers get paid overtime for working nights and weekends to lessen the impact to their fellow NYers during the main working hours of the weekdays. Just maybe.<br/><br/>I ride the subway constantly, and have been in the system at all hours and seven days a week, and the work is being done mostly during off hours. If I had to work nights and weekends, I'd expect to be paid overtime. Why are NYCT workers an exception?
Did anyone else notice that the 2nd Ave subway doesnt have a modern switching system? Why is that true? Its brand new!!!<br/><br/>switching systems at individual platforms need to be integrated into the system as a whole, not on a stand alone basis. That's not how they work. 
that costs money, down time on the system. Doubt riders will appreciate the higher fares, delays. 
local transit organizations in the US, whether they be in DC, SF or other cities, are pretty inept. 
Mainly it's that the emergency braking rates on trains in the latter 20th century were not as high, and NYC Transit only discovered that this mismatches the signal designs when trains collided on the Williamsburg Bridge and killed people. They had to then put a cap on acceleration and top speed. They introduced timer signals to get some rudimentary speed control.<br/><br/>But more to your point, it's not that through-capacity is lacking. It's also that their schedule design practices don't make it easy to run high frequencies. So, every time they try to run closer to the edge of capacity, the lateness of the trains mounts up (due to poor scheduling design) and eventually the operations folks complain - and then service gets cut.
Thanks for the information. 
That's not a good example.  The time schedule is not that different.
I see 4 workers, not 6. And there's a very valid reason the others aren't working; all repair crews include flaggers whose job it is to make sure that the trains are aware of their presence on the roadbed so no one gets run over. Also, this crew is doing a lot more than just working on that switch right there; you just don't see what the rest of them were supposed to do in the photo.
You are correct that overall it has improved since those dark days.  That doesn't mean they get a pass for not being more forward thinking regarding the signals.<br/>The unions are indeed an issue.<br/>You cite the example of the free wifi being done relatively quickly. Well it was not paid for by us taxpayers.  It was done with private money.  That's why it got finished relatively quickly.   Had it not been - we'd still be at least 5 years away from that service now.
Yes, the system and the city has improved over the past 40 years, but that does not negate the fact that we are decades behind the rest of the world. <br/><br/>The cultural improvements of the system and city are not enough. We, being NEW YORK CITY, should have the best system in the world!<br/><br/>If China can build Shanghai in 20 years and UAE can build Dubai in roughly the same time, we can do better. We SHOULD do better.<br/><br/>We MUST hold Albany accountable and the MTA must be purged from top to bottom. If the MTA were a private company, it would have been sued into oblivion or beat out by a competitor.
People DO love to complain. I also grew up and lived here 50 years, and remember well the horrors of the old school trains. People love to romanticize, "It was so cool back then", but really it WASN'T.  Frankly it could slow, scary, dangerous given the wrong moments. The noise, the graffiti, litter, delays in service... oy.  <br/><br/>That said, OF COURSE we need infrastructure revamp; AND HOW.  Now is the time to plan, and invest.  Nothing is getting younger, within the giant clunking system.
The Swiss used the same approach when they replaced some 'time expired' viaducts.
"What has changed is not clear."<br/><br/>Might it possibly be due to more useless, parasitic , self-serving bureaucrats and the stupid regulations that they use as an excuse for their poor performance?
Sorry but the compensation is public info.  It's not the "fat cats".  It's the "rank and file" members pension and healthcare costs that eat up the biggest chunk of the budget.  You can look it up.
Surely it would be unwise, even unsafe, to simply shutdown the existing signalling system then switch on the new one.That train of thought would lead to chaos.
True that the transit Unions have been given by Congress way too much power to strangle the public, but this statement is not accurate as far as I know:<br/><br/>"...the MTA requires that the current signaling system be maintained even if a new CBTC system is put in place"
If you want it to cost $15 a ride....
The entire system should be operated by state and local governments. Without a profit motive, the system is more efficient. A private company would be incapable of managing a public transportation system because of greed.<br/><br/>Fixed it for ya.
Maybe United Airlines? You have got to be kidding. Private corporations are interested in one thing only, PROFIT!
That's an idealized system that would never come into existence in real life. Consider a system that would cost roughly double what the current system costs but would only be utilized at 50% capacity. No real life city operates can operate in this manner.
What a ridiculous notion.<br/><br/>You do realize that they could just as easily "staged" a photo opp where multiple workers in the frame are kneeling and appearing to do something?
Honestly! How could you suggest such a thing? Isn't it obvious, the others are giving the chap encouragement.
There are four alternatives to the train into New York City from NJ - you could drive, take the bus, the ferry or if you are a Wall Street fat cat, you could take the helicopter.
It totally depends on where you are coming from and where you are going. Some people have a not-too-distant alternative, as in an alternate subway that they could take, but it could be farther away at either or both ends, and probably would take longer. Buses are another alternative but they take much longer than the subway and make more frequent stops (other than the express buses that run to more distant locations in the city), plus buses are subject to the same vagaries as the rest of NYC street traffic.
I found it on the MTA website:<br/><br/><a href="http://web.mta.info/nyct/facts/ridership/" title="http://web.mta.info/nyct/facts/ridership/" target="_blank">http://web.mta.info/nyct/facts/ridership/</a>
Sure we can update the trains, but we have to use these outdated sensors that just so happen to be manufactured by my cousin. And we have to hire my brother-in-law's construction workers to install them. And they have to be supervised by my uncle's management company. Of course none of this can begin before my son's safety-inspection company does a full year-long surveillance. And who could forget the board of directors? Have to fork over something to them since they were so kind as to give us their blessing to run their business for them. But so long as my college roommate's cleaning company gets the contract for making sure there's no debris afterwords.. I'm sure we have enough money to actually get the job done! Wait.. now where did it all go? We should ask for more next time...
As One Who Knows, I can say you're pretty close to being correct. It's not only dispatching but mostly it's schedule design. If you can get these two things both right, then you can run a lot of service. Minor modifications to the signaling in certain places can help, too... But absolutely, common sense... it's not sexy, but it works.
You are being sarcastic, of course. I agree with your point. If I may make a similar one here:<br/><br/>The article has us throwing our hands up in the air in frustration, perhaps by design. Matters of money are frequently cast as Hatfields vs. McCoys. I want to cut through that.<br/><br/>In the richest nation in the world there is plenty of money for our nation's infrastructure if billionaires and large, profitable corporations resume paying their fair share of taxes. Increasingly over the past 40 years they haven't. And we must use that money efficiently—government must be nominally large enough to provide oversight for the projects—and the tax dodgers. To do that we must clean house from local races to Washington; to do that we must get big money out of politics. Begin with putting an end to Citizens United.<br/><br/>One sees, it's not all that complicated and certainly not hopeless.
So how much of the money collected goes to pensions? Please quote a reliable source not just you opinion
John Lusk.  I don't have to quote.  It's public information.  Anyone can look it up online.
They stopped topping up future liabilities, so actually they should be putting aside more, but they decide not to because they can't keep cutting service and raising fares.
That is a financing  problem, not a design and implementation problem.
And I'm sure a cure for cancer will be found if we just look a little bit harder, right?
Sorry, but no amount of money (within reason) can magically shrink time or eliminate demand on a 24-hour system.
Well your last comment gets it a little backward.  NY is dynamic partly because of the subway.  The subway is a victim of its own success.  Political folly is what prevents it from meeting the current needs its success brought on.
gps underground?
One point that can be made, is that the signaling equipment of the 1920's and 30's must have been built to last for it to be still working. Those who originally installed it would, I guess, be absolutely amazed to know there handiwork was still in use.<br/><br/>One point I would like clarifying if possible - whilst I understand there has been an increase in ridership, train 'sets' are longer today than those of the 30's. In the past there would have been more train movements due to shorter trains. Surely longer, higher capacity, more recent trains with the same level of train movements as in the past should help alleviate the problem.
Bunch of charlatans suggesting something inappropriate.
It's not as difficult as you think.
"It's not as difficult as you think"<br/><br/>Really? Please expand on your statement or could you recommend a source of information if possible. I am fascinated. Aged electro-mechanical switching has always interested me.
The thing in the photo is called a relay. Even the newer Automatic Train Control systems use relays. They are used to encode the logic for what a signal aspect should be, based on the inputs from the track circuits. The track circuits themselves are copper wired and in wayside signalling like in NY, are based on the concept that when the two rails are connected by a heavy object (a train), a circuit is made, reflecting occupancy in that circuit (which represents a section of track averaging 500 feet long, which can be from 50 feet minimum to 1500 feet maximum). In late 1960s era technology, this was done via audio-frequency circuits. One rail becomes the detector for occupancy within the circuit, between a transmitter at one end of the track section (also 50 feet to 1500 feet) and a receiver. Relays still handle the logic for the speed codes given.<br/><br/>Basically the signal maintenance people replace relays when they get beyond a certain age, because the wires deteriorate with usage (like any copper wiring). If the enclosure is not made any more, they can take it apart and put new copper wires in it. The contacts are gold and so they don't lose conductivity.<br/><br/>Very few places in the US use solid-state vital technology. One of them happens to be in the NY City subway: the Bergen Street Interlocking on the F line, which was the first solid-state interlocking in the US. London did some solid-state interlockings on the Central Line in the 1990s. 
They only know where numbered (IRT) trains are all the time. 
There is no problem, except the maintenance cost of the respective technologies. If the cost of maintenance goes up, they will maintain less and reliability will get worse. <br/><br/>"Why not use the existing stoplight infrastructure to tell a train to stop if it is getting too close, or speed up if there is room in front of it?"  - This is what the signalling at NYC Transit and elsewhere has been doing since the 1920s.<br/><br/>You've been (understandably) confused by the statement someone made, "we don't know where our trains our". There is (almost) no territory in the NYC Subway network where a train's location is not being watched in a room by signal operators or service controllers. Some of these locations are distributed (in towers or 'master towers') and some are centralized in a control center. <br/><br/>The display of train location is computerized for more than half of the system. In most cases this computerization is an overlay on top of older signaling (you wouldn't be able to tell the difference unless someone told you). Computerization of the front end helps in some ways but not in other ways. It really depends on the management to get the most of out the technology. NYC Transit is neither behind nor ahead in that regard. 
Not correct. The only place they do not know the train locations in NY is a very small interlocking in the Bronx which they choose to leave unstaffed for budgetary reasons. New York has never had any dark territory in decades. If they had any, the people who know about it are long dead.<br/><br/>The only subway systems in the world which had any dark territory were Chicago until a few years ago (most of the system was dark), and before that Philadelphia's Broad St and Market-Frankfort lines; the London Underground Central Line before the early 1990s, and before that it stretches anyone's memory (Boston's Blue Line prior to the mid 1980s perhaps).<br/><br/>The IRT is on a newer computerized overlay which integrates the schedules automatically with the train locations. Nearly all of Queens has a computer overlay at Queensboro Plaza tower. The L also has a computer overlay. The remainder of the system comes back into localized towers or master towers and had been for decades. The IND had it right from the start - the 1920s.
The main difference between London and New York is that gasoline is 4x as expensive there, and so everyone works in cities rather than more than half of people working in suburbs. The Underground is a first class system, i.e. only for people who can pay a very high fare. Everyone else takes the bus. The reason for this is that the Tube doesn't have the capacity to meet latent demand. So, lots of important people ride it, and they have high expectations. In New York, people who have money take taxis to work. Consequently the subway is seen politically as less important in NY. On the other hand, London has a difficult time doing the signalling upgrades - they've virtually bankrupted themselves trying to manage the projects. Every consortium which was delivering those projects went bankrupt (look up London Underground PPP and you'll see...)
This would be so abusive to the poor and already marginalized in our city. There are people who can't afford monthly cards and end up spending more annually than the corporate types who get to pay with pre tax dollars. It would be so punitive to do that when the city only invests in neighborhoods already gentrified. 
Are you seriously implying protesting and improving our country's failing infrastructure are mutually exclusive?
New signaling is never installed with capacity as an objective. It's installed with the objective of reducing maintenance cost. Capacity is an afterthought because it's possible to get decent capacity from older technologies. Capacity is not New York's problem with subways. They choose not to run more frequently because they don't have the money. If they did run more frequently, they wouldn't know how to design the timetables accordingly, because that's not as trivial, but that's another matter.
Another idea along the lines of increasing the number of doors is to decrease the number of seats. That way you can fit more people into a car.<br/><br/>A more complex idea is to create a system by which people on the platforms can align themselves ahead of time with where the emptier cars will stop. It's very common for a train to pull into the station with half of the cars packed like sardines and the other half relatively empty. Put signals on the platform that communicate with load sensors on the cars and tell people where to stand so that when the train pulls in people will be standing in front of the emptier cars. <br/><br/>People on the platform will be able to board more quickly, people in the crowded cars will be able to exit more quickly, and the overall experience will be more enjoyable.
retrofit the cars? have subway only stop every 25 blocks? get rid of express stops? wha? thanks but no thanks!
The MTA did hire an executive from London, Jay Walder. Walder left because the Unions were so much more powerful in NY than in London, and there was very little he could do to implement the changes he wanted to make. His staff were unhappy and no one wanted to work there.<br/><br/>We hear that the "management should have their salary cut" all the time by armchair "experts". But the reality is that to get good managers, you need to pay them well. It's not like running a grocery store. The other unfortunate fact is that the congressional Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964 turned unionized public transit employees into the most powerful of the four classes of employees in the United States, by an order of magnitude. 99.9999% of the population is covered only by the Department of Labor, but transit workers are somehow special. The management has zero right to determine the employee's compensation package. The real problem is that the pensions and health care costs of the employees and retirees and retirees families has already bankrupted almost every transit authority in the US. They are all walking zombies. The NYC Transit stopped paying future operating debt obligations a long time ago. There's a ticking time bomb there and no going back. 
"I'd like to learn more about the intersection of unions/labor and the high cost of service and maintenance."<br/><br/>Essentially the management has no right to set compensation packages for unionized employees. When health care costs went up, transit authorities (and in turn, riders and taxpayers both) were stuck with this. The only options are to raise fares or cut service. When you cut service, the demand drops... Vicious cycle. And no talented managers want to work in that environment.
You had a great system there.
When the lines were being built, the workers didn't have to stop everything every few minutes to let a train go past because the trains weren't there yet.<br/><br/>We can replace the signals in less time than it took to build the subways if we're willing to shut the subways down completely while the work is being done. Are you willing to do without the subways for the entire time it takes to get the new signals installed?
I was recently in Tokyo and other cities in Japan and compared to what I saw and used, describing Americas public transit and infrastructure as being "third world" is generous in its description and with the governments in power in Washington it can only get worse.
And where exactly do you propose to store all those morning trains after they reach the S end of the 1 line?
Gerhard, I would guess that the signals installed on the Second Avenue extension had to be compatible with the ones on the rest of the Q Line, and there was neither time nor funding to install the transponders, radios, zone controllers, on-train computers and speed sensors along the entire Q line to Coney Island.
"and the signal system on the 2nd Ave line was not upgraded with it ???"<br/><br/>Hm, the 2nd avenue line was just built, thus those signals are NEW.   The problem isn't that the signals weren't upgraded, the problem is that the project was managed by corrupt people elected by a corrupt populace, and actually doing the job right is considered a grave offense by such people. 
I guess you're not aware that both Bill Clinton and Obama proposed really large-scale upgrades and investments to Amtrak, which were shot down, and Trump's proposed severe budget cuts and left any upgrades to local areas?<br/><br/>Look, I get that you want to blame liberals for everything and I get that Amtrak has issues, but the fact is that we simply MUST invest in infrastructure in this country, and historically, Republicans have been the ones preventing this. The fact that you (and people like you) refuse to acknowledge reality in pursuit of politics will not help us as a nation.
The GOP has, indeed, opposed most federal spending except for the military. That does not mean, however, that Obama or Clinton proposed or supported significant investments in social enterprises like mass transit. They did not. They, in fact,were more willing to cut Federal spending than either Bush Sr. or Bush Jr.<br/>The larger point is that the way forward for the US is something other than neoliberalism, a program that values those things that we all share and that benefit all of society. I don't think the Democrats are ready to sign up to any such program.
Really? It's the R that refuse to spend any money except new bombs! Remember Gerald Fords comment to NYC during the crisis"DROP DEAD"
Not to mention sound systems that are so loud they could damage your ear drums; announcements that are unintelligible; noise of subway cars so deafening they cause hearing loss.  <br/><br/>NYC needs control of the MTA-this political patronage agency was outed during the Christie bridge gate scandal &amp; continues to operate in the shadows.  Time for some disinfectant and money spent where it is needed, now before its too late!
No thanks! remember he thought 9/11 occurred on Obama's watch?
Also seek more automation to reduce the number of staff needed.
You are absolutely correct, but to accomplish this ("restructure the pensions, cut the benefits...", NYC Transit needs to enter bankruptcy first. 
There was an old term that applies here, it's called "featherbedding", as when back in the day railroad unions insisted that diesel locomotives still needed a fireman who used to shovel coal.
You can blame Bush Jr.'s tax cuts, unfunded wars, out of control defense spending and greedy private health care and insurance companies for all that. We are still paying for Wall St. misbehavior in 2007-8, that put millions out of work, foreclosed homes and lower wage jobs, forcing those millions onto food stamps, housing vouchers and 'disability'. The Wall St. fatcats had their bonuses paid by taxpayers along with the bailouts.
In reply to Lonely Republican NYC<br/><br/>I like your nom de plume.
Where did all the money go? Saving the banking/financial sector from collapse in 2008-9. Meaning less $ around to spend on things such as...erm...infrastructure projects et al.
Why? Free-market conservatives would probably say that the entire transit system should be abandoned if it can't pay for itself via fares.
You're so right. One simply cannot be concerned about subways AND inner-cities. Thank you for pointing this out.
Never
Maybe Putin can convince Trump...nah.
Thank you Woof! This is a great comment.
There will be no infrastructure spending bill. That was an empty campaign promise. Republicans do not spend on such things, which would benefit the common people.
Right, Lisa, because the Democrats have done so much better?  They're both to blame!
In reply to Lisa CA<br/><br/>President Trump is becoming known for keeping his promises. He will not get everything he wants right away, but by perseverance he will achieve his goals. How else do you think he built a $3.7B real estate empire.<br/><br/>When President Trump gets his infrastructure bill passed, let's meet again on these columns, and from you I will expect a humble apology.
"Signal failures are proportional to the amount of preventive maintenance. Maintenance is down because of high labor costs, which are high because the unions have taken advantage of the fact that transit workers are the only class of employee in the United States with more labor rights than their management, due to Section 5333 of the Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964."<br/><br/>Imagine what American agricultural produce/services would cost if illegal immigrants were given ANY labor rights?  Too much unnecessary money being paid to necessary people is a cultural NIGHTMARE for America.  MAGA: #pre-1964?
The primary responsibility for the NYC subway system belongs to NYC and the State of New York, not the federal government.
That the FAA air traffic control system is out of date and needs replacement has been known for at least 25 years. It is truly not a secret and Congress has not leaped to the rescue.
That's what i meant with  "its us against them" ,  We're no longer The "United" States where Congress for decades worked smoothly to unite Fed. investment for infrastructure programs.
Not totally correct on (2) and (3). Train acceleration and top speed was capped during the timespan you mention, due to unsafe braking distances, which were highlighted by the Williamsburg Bridge accident. That is ultimately what caused capacity to drop the most. The obvious answer would have been to increase the emergency brake rate on the whole fleet.
I grew up during a time when passengers knew that if they blocked doors, they wouldn't be quickly reopened, so they didn't do it as much.  I would follow that practice and let other passengers' impatience motivate the individual to release the doors.  People would get used to it.
Interesting that the system went for 50-60 years, I think, without a passenger fatality until the Roosevelt Avenue crossover collision caused by conductor/motorman communication error.  With thousands of instances of safe keying-by every year, wasn't the Williamsburg Bridge accident operator error?  I understand slower speeds as a response, but that alone shouldn't prevent better headways.  They've got to solve the dwell-time problem.  Again, the system operated safely for decades with 30+ TPH and the existing signal system.  What's changed?
New York City is the city that America loves to hate.  Apparently we're good for SOMETHING but they'll never admit it.
Washington D.C. had the most up to date subway system in the 1980s.  I guess they rank.
New York State has a GDP of $1.103 trillion USD, if the city and state can't fund this improvement, I'm not sure why the rest of the country should pay for it.  
We could do better , if we had design engineers in Cabinet positions instead of lawyers and Wall ST. investors. 
NYCT wastes over half of its maintenance money already, and the above poster thinks the fix for that is to shovel more at it.  
Having one person at each station power washing the platforms would do wonders for the acrid stench of urine and make the city far more presentable. 
what are people who work the graveyard shift supposed to do?  it's their tax dollars too!
While a good idea, they already do that, it's called the "FASTTRACK" maintenance program, which has been around since 2012 and shuts down select lines Mon. to Fri. from 10pm to 5am. They announce a full year's schedule at one time, subject to change, and are pretty good about putting up signage to remind you when your line is being "FASTTRACKED". To my surprise, having just googled it, I see that they actually report what they were able to complete during the "FASTTRACK" closures.  I guess things would be in even worse shape without it? I don't generally find the closures to be an issue, but I expect people who work later or nights probably find it disruptive. 
Yes! What AWG said.<br/><br/>But I think it's worth saying out loud what few people have been willing to say out loud but has been obvious to me all along: Chris Christie killed the NJ-NY rail tunnel for the most selfish of political reasons - the national GOP and its primary voters are mostly hostile to rail transit on general principle, and Christie wanted to run for president, so he ended to project to make himself more appealing to GOP voters and power brokers.
Again. The Mayor DOES NOT control the Transit System, the Governor does!!!
Dan, de Blasio doesn't control the MTA. No mayor does. The MTA is a state agency. Look to the Governor and your state legislators.
MTA is state run; i.e. Gov. cuomo's responsibility, not DeBlasio's.
I see.  It's the workers' fault, not the people who make the decisions.  Got it.
You know why that will never happen, JMax?  Because it makes no sense.
Bectel?  like the Big Dig in Boston, or the incompetence at the National Labs?  No thanks.
I beg to differ with your calling out of Central Park as a great example of "public-private partnership." This union-busting scam perpetrated by Bloomberg brought in volunteers to take the place of tenured city workers who were well trained and equipped to maintain the park. Since Bloomberg's great vision of the Central Park Conservancy (translation: replace city workers with volunteers), how many people have been killed by limbs falling from un-maintained trees? Three by my count. One an infant. These "public-private partnerships" may save a lot of money but they cost a lot in terms of human life.
Don't ever compare our infrastructure and efficient engineering to the Swiss.<br/>Remember the Big Dig?<br/>Could of used some of their expertise for that one. No?
77% goes to payroll/benefits for their employees --- a LARGE chunk for those already retired.<br/><br/><a href="http://web.mta.info/mta/budget/pdf/MTA%202015%20Adopted%20Budget%20February%20Financial%20Plan%202015-2018.pdf" title="http://web.mta.info/mta/budget/pdf/MTA%202015%20Adopted%20Budget%20February%20Financial%20Plan%202015-2018.pdf" target="_blank">http://web.mta.info/mta/budget/pdf/MTA%202015%20Adopted%20Budget%20Febru...</a>
The Los Angeles Metro is only 25 years old and continues to expand.<br/><br/>MUNI runs on the surface streets of San Francisco. Only a portion runs as MUNI Metro underneath Market Street. Additionally, MUNI has antiquated work rules that negatively impact timeliness and reliability.<br/><br/>Neither of them have the same problems as New York's much larger and older transit systems.
Don't forget Chicago! We have millions who depend on public transportation every day and yet we let it fall apart.
What I said is that instead of paying taxes for hugely expensive weapons systems like Reagans Star Wars and the most recent debacle, The F-35 fighter jet we could have saved a trillion + just with these two. The F-35 is a failure. Instead of paying for these with our taxes we should invest our hard earned tax dollars in systems that serve people. Like the NY Subway which if you'd read the article is in deplorable shape. There is such a thing as public commons still. Also the common good, it's in our constitution. That's what taxes are for. Our fares are kept low so that people can afford to ride it. Fares will never pay for what I've stated. We need public investment.
Bureaucracy, lawyers, bloated salaries and benefits, little to no acccountabilty, years wasted on one study after another, environmental demands, etc., etc.  How's that for a start?
As is our medical care system.
My guess it's something that has to do with insurance. It's not like workers in Tokyo are getting paid less.
Don't speak for New Yorkers. Thanks
It never ends because maintenance is forever.
Not so long ago I witnessed an angry or mentally disturbed rider threatening a booth agent in a frightening rage. Had the agent not been protected I'm convinced she would have been assaulted. Not such an easy job.
I'm sorry but how is this relevant to how efficiently or competently they do their jobs? This is New York City, we're all under constant threat from crazies, every day. You sound like John Samuelson who constantly uses his depiction of MTA workers as brave heroes who are under threat from violence as political leverage. Anyone who works with the public in this city is under threat every day. MTA workers are nothing special. Try working in a bodega in the Bronx. 
I'm simply curious:  If she had been a fit 20 year old, would it have impacted your view of the nail-painting?  If not, why did you include these details about her?  
Another reason for this may be found in Ike's original speech, which described a Military, Industrial and Congressional complex. Until his speechwriter removed "congressional". 
I'll chime in to add here, too, that Obama had infrastructure as a priority only to be thwarted by McConnell and his complicit Republican senators.  I don't see much getting done here as long as McConnell's still majority leader -- he's already said it's still not a priority even under a Trump administration. 
NYCT does not run outside of New York City, much less NY state.  It's not an inter-state system, so there is zero reason that residents of the other 49 (or 56 ;-) states need to pay for it.  Nor should we be paying for their pet projects, unless they're in the national interest. 
Yo mean north of New Paltz or Poughkeepsie?
the rich do depend on the subway-its the most efficient form of transport we have-do we need a go-fund me campaign?-sad that the life blood of the city has been neglected and underfunded due to Albany/City political nonsense<br/>Its time for the funding to be raised to repair/replace and insure a modern functioning system NOW.
The rich do ride the subway...its the most efficient mode of transport in the City, despite its many ills.
Updating a train system isn't beyond our abilities. But updating a train system *while it's running* is beyond just about everyone's abilities, the same way that repairing a car while it's being driven down a highway is.
Empire State Building, start to finish, 13 months? Can you imagine that today? 
Yes, you can keep your tax dollars, and pay for Obamacare yourself, too, and keep your ridiculous major.  And instead of voting to raise taxes for everyone, just volunteer to pay more on your own.
Or, like Atlanta, use federal funds to build more and more highways crisscrossing your city so everyone can stay in their air-conditiioned cars while they sit in endless traffic jams.  Funny how often free-market fiscal conservatives are from states that take more from the fed than they pay into it (hint:  if you see confederate flags flying, you're probably in a state mooching off the rest of us).
Let me know when that high speed rail that's been proposed between Atlanta and surrounding cities like Chattanooga get approved by my native southerners.  Doesn't seem like any time soon as long as the Red States keep sending GOP senators and congresspersons to D.C. who toe McConnell's line against infrastructure spending.  I rode the high speed train between Paris and Lyon way back in 2006 -- and thought it's ridiculous the U.S. hasn't caught on to this yet.
There is an elevator bank to the #1 train at 168th St with one of the 4 elevators staffed by a full time operator.  This is for safety reasons,  There are vulnerable populations that need an employee in an elevator.
Pat wrote: "We need a complete overhaul of the salary and pensions for civil employees. In the private sector there are almost no pensions left (except for those who joined 25-30 years ago). Why are there pensions in the public sector?"<br/><br/>You think taking it out of the hide of retired workers is a good idea?  We should be asking, WHY are almost no pensions left?  Why are people who worked for years and years facing retirement crisis?  Making other people miserable because our pensions have vanished is not a solution.  We need to look hard at the priorities of our whole society.  Lets start with these endless wars and the money shoveled to "defense" contracters.
We are paying the price for this neglect right now.  We have to look at our national priorities seriously.  We can start by looking at the obscene amount we spend on war and what is by far the world's largest military establishment.  If we stop fighting unnecessary wars, much else will become possible.
Predergast isn't allowed to manage it better. It's a patronage machine that reluctantly produces transit, not a business focused on profitability and customer service. 
There's a huge difference between the London Underground and the NYC Subway system. Nearly the entire Underground closes overnight for cleaning and maintenance. Can you imagine that happening in NYC, the city that never sleeps?
Consider that most trunk lines today run a train about every 2.5 to 3 minutes - that's about 24 TPH at most.  (The Lexington Avenue and Queens lines, both E/F and #7, are exceptions, with more service.)  Even running 30TPH would be a 20% improvement, which is radical.  Plus there would be safety and communication advantages.  Not improving the existing system does not mean it can be left alone - there would still be constant maintenance and repair.  The system need to be updated.  What ALSO needs to be addressed is the customer behavior that results in long dwell times in stations.  You can't run a train every two minutes unless a train is in and out of the station in one minute.
The sole benefit of this decades long project is not an extra 7 trains a hour, that's a side benefit.<br/>The benefits are to move signaling from the steam and valve technology onto maintainable technology, ya know, like not trying to use your 80 year old model T as a daily driver and most importantly having train to train command and control. Trains getting too close to each other are slowed or stopped, trains going to fast for the speed limit (regular or temporary) are slowed.<br/>This basically installs autopilot on all the trains and the engineer becomes a pilot monitoring the systems.<br/>Fun Fact :The London Underground Victoria line has had 'driverless' Automatic Train Operation since it opened.  The train operator closes the train doors and presses a pair of "start" buttons, and if the way ahead is clear, the ATO drives the train at a safe speed to the next station. This system has operated since the line opened in 1968, making the Victoria line the world's first full-scale automatic railway.
The existing equipment isn't replaceable, no one manufactures equipment that antiquated. The Transit Authority often has to repair its machines with homemade parts.<br/><br/>Also, it isn't solely about running the trains closer. They could run them faster - the speed limit is about 30mph now, since a collision approx 20 years ago. The trains themselves can go faster, but the current signal system can't handle that speed safely.<br/><br/>There are all kinds of benefits to actually knowing what train is where. Look at the control room photo at the top of the article, that board has blinking lights that show which signal block is occupied by a train. Determining which train is which requires cross-referencing radio communications, schedules, and whatever tracking dispatchers can do in their heads. More reliable information would allow better handling of traffic and passenger wait times. Plus we could finally get accurate systemwide arrival clocks and arrival estimates in mobile apps.
Chicago public transport - dreadful.  Chicago to Fort Wayne, no train service for passengers.
@Cheryl did you not read the article carefully?  New York CITY political leaders do not manager the MTA, and so cannot be responsible.  That power and responsibility lies with New York State in Albany, which has never provided a stable source of funding for the MTA.
Governor Cuomo, not Mayor di Blasio, is in charge of the MTA, a State Agency, which includes New York City Transit.
@ JEG and Larry Greenfield - you're correct.
Let's get the signals into the 21st Century before we worry about the cars.  
The L train *does* have automatic operation (funny that wan't mentioned as a major reason to implement a "communication-based" system).  Normally, the "train operator" just makes sure the AO is working properly.
You can't have self-driving trains done safely without a major redesign of the system.  If you look at those systems that have robotic trains, they have such features as stations designed with door systems that keep people off the tracks until a train enters and opens its own doors.  And most such systems do not handle anything like the amount of people that the NY system does.  Imagine a self driving train on the Shuttle at rush hour--how is it going to deal with the crush of people on the narrow platforms?<br/><br/>As for your contention that labor is the single largest MTA expense--I'd like to see that statement backed up with some facts and figures.
It's funny you say that, I was in the west fourth street station yesterday (which was filthy) and saw a cleaner using a small, ragged looking broom to clean &lt;50% of the loose debris. There is a layer of scuz on every station that only needs water, soap, and some effort to remove. It's an embarrassment. 
Not only London, but Paris, every 2 minutes, all auto driven. The so called driver sits up front only as a monitor. Some of their trains  run on ribber tiers, for decades. Quiet, too. The Barcelona tubes, not only say the minute(s) for arrival, but the seconds as well. Our mapping systems are also difficult, and hard to read, especially for our older riders.This makes no sense. The only positive the subways have are the drawings and paintings graphically in the trains itself. My six year old grandson so looking at the warnings on the door said to me: "Grandfather: 'Do Not lean on Door,' isn't right is it?" He sensed that it should say doors, and still he felt something wrong. While he is not terribly aware  of prepositions he did sense that they were missing. Anyway, not that I am a grammarian: "We are being held momentarily by...,"  Is wrong and annoying.
Sorry, but the practices of the MTA over 30 years ago is about as irrelevant as if you wanted to discuss the state of freeways in relation to the subway system.<br/><br/>Your absence points directly to improvements the Authority has made in its hiring practices (which, again, are irrelevant to the question of installing a new signal system to improve system efficiency). 
are you kidding?  he will build it &amp; you will pay for it! no thanks.
If you look closely there is a white hard hat working on the adjacent track. Working on signals, with your head down, and hearing protection in place, leaves the workers vulnerable from on coming trains, also pictured. There is always a look out stationed when any track work is performed and service is still running.
maybe a last ditch safety issue...  watching for any approaching trains.   I'd like someone to have my back in that work environment as well!  
He is a flagger. When a train comes his job is to make sure everyone is in the clear. He then removes safety equipment (trip) and gives the train permission to proceed. Other times you'll see track guys waiting to move a rail. It takes a lot of guys. You can't always use a crane.
This the same problem not only affecting MTA, but other transit agencies across the country.  In the Washington, DC area, WMATA is literally in the same predicament.  <br/><br/>I thought "Make America Great Again" meant Trump will fix all these issues #sarcasm
So many commenters keep forgetting something the article makes sure to mention - the Mayor and City Council don't control the MTA. (I'm sure they wish they did.) It's a state agency.<br/><br/>So pressure your Assembly members, your state Senators, your Governor.
None of that flailing in the wind will fix the basic problem, which is the cultural corruption of NYC.  
<br/>Mr. Green - there could be a number of reasons why this employee in the background is "leaning against a post watching".  He could be on a break, he could be waiting for a supervisor, he could be waiting for materials to be delivered or waiting for other co-workers to perform a job safely.  And the list could go on.  What I find irresponsible is the erroneous assumption that this employee is just standing around, getting paid to do nothing.  You might be correct.  I might be correct.  But the bottom line is that NO ONE knows why he is standing there and to accuse someone without having any factual intel is reckless and unwarranted.  I apologize if I have offended anyone.  I just detest generalizations made without any facts present to support the accusation.
There are four more idle workers in the back.
As I said, it's an "illustration."  Of course I don't know the specific reason he's standing there, but how can anyone argue the point that the subway workforce is used efficiently?
"Two hours east of Tijuana" are you kidding me, yeah it is in Mexicali.  Good for them, I hope they do kick butt in soccer, and baseball.
Why are California taxpayers paying for two Mexican nationals to attend high school in California.  
That Tec de Monterrey, which even its permissiveness is arguably the best university in Latin America, could not compete in a North American college sports league and a university that most likely has non existing academic filters (such as Cetys) is better positioned to do so now is regretful -- Great way to foster the stereotype of the undereducated Mexican.
Great read, thank you for reporting this. One of many cases of cross-border life in the San Diego-Tijuana hub. 
As a Big Ten graduate, I would be very happy with this.
We know which university is going to win the soccer championship....
WONDERFUL!<br/>MARAVILLOSO!<br/>GREAT FOR SPORTS ON BOTH SIDES OF THE BORDER
Bloodletting/iron reduction therapy has been used for thousands of years and only now is making a resurgence.<br/>"Therapy by taking away: the case of iron"
"Not everyone that commits a crime is a criminal." Are you serious???    <a href="https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/criminal" title="https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/criminal" target="_blank">https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/criminal</a> <br/><br/>I don't believe that we should be deporting our citizens or those that have followed proper procedures to live here. However, it is a crime to cross our borders without following procedures or gaining permission to so, and that makes the person a criminal worthy of exile/deportation.
This piece belongs on the front page, not on the opinion page.  Everything about it is reporting on facts, present and past.  There's no room for "alternative facts" in this world, so let's start fighting the real fight and stop pretending that all messages have equal merit and deserve equal airtime.  The NYTs has its bully pulpit - we readers expect you to use it more fully.  
The analogy with Nazi Germany...<br/><br/>Jews were refugees who were turned away while fleeing Nazi German.<br/><br/>Mexicans are refugees being turned away while fleeing Mexico.<br/><br/>Go figure...
Do not downplay the events of the Third Reich, and the systemic mass murder of millions directly or indirectly (starting the war and bringing on the Holocaust) and the current American administration. It is an outrageous overstatement which does no credit to someone with high flown academic credentials. The DT White House has more in common with a bumbling third world dictator or a pompous strutting fascist like Mussolini.<br/><br/>The argument before SCOTUS by Sessions DOJ in Maslenjak v, U.S. is jaw-dropping enough without resort to hyperbole. Leave that to the Breitbart, Murdoch, and Bannon circles, and the swamp of white nationalists on the net here and abroad. Their stock and trade is the half-truth twisted and exaggerated.
why aren't Europeans and Canadians who have overstayed their visas being arrested and deported?
Thank you for this thoughtful piece.
We know that other groups who are here on a visa have committed crimes such as traffic violations and much more serious crimes.  We know that other groups have overstayed their visas, thus breaking the law of the United States, but Trump is only concerned with arresting people of color.  All others are safe as long as they are white. 50,000 Irish men and women who have over stayed their visas and not one has been arrested, torn from their homes or deported.   Discrimination in these laws and bands must be investigated by the Judges who question them. This should not happen to anyone, but if it is going to happen, it should involve people from Europe as well as Muslim countries.  If not, it must be stopped.
When the new cast of authoritarian characters--Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and Filipino President Rodrigo Détente--is added to the usuals--Putin, Xi, Castro, Maduro and Kim, control of anyone's citizenship would be a most explosive situation.<br/><br/>Trump doesn't appear to assign hit squads to assassinate any individuals, or opposing groups; however, can we ever be sure that he won't.  Erdogan has moved incrementally, nationalizing some corporations, taking-over the media, replacing the top generals with his men, and fabricating the charade of a coup, several months ago, in order to grab more, and more, power.<br/><br/>I certainly wouldn't put anything past him.The "Trump Republican Party" sits idly by, as the GOP "Leadership: and Trump use each other; but, in the meantime, he--like Erdogan--has been raising his relative status.<br/><br/>As it appear, at least in Donald's delusional mind, Donald J. Trumpo is above everyone, and everything--the Congress, the Constitution, and "We, the People."<br/><br/>This whole charade must e=be brought to a halt!<br/><br/><a href="https://thetruthoncommonsense.com" title="https://thetruthoncommonsense.com" target="_blank">https://thetruthoncommonsense.com</a>
"Immigrants without legal status" is a preposterous way to describe illegals, They are no such thing. They are illegals and they can be sent home. It's not a human rights violation to do so. 
So interesting to see commenters here defending the current approach to immigration. I urge everyone who thinks it's a good idea we have this new office for so-called "victims" of crimes committed by so-called illegal immigrants to ask:<br/>--How is one to know whether a crime was committed by an immigrant?<br/>--If one does know a crime is committed by an immigrant, how is one to know that person's status as an immigrant?<br/>--Isn't a crime a crime regardless of who committed it or their status?<br/>--If the answer to that last question is "no," then what does that mean going forward for our country as a democracy?<br/>It is worth noting that any legal system anywhere can be co-opted by people determined to be despotic. Institutions and laws alone will not save us from that fate--as MLK Jr. wrote from Birmingham jail, "we should never forget that everything Adolf Hitler did in Germany was "legal.""
There is a huge difference between persecution and prosecution. The comparison between the Jews of Nazi Germany and our own illegals doesn't stand precisely because of this distinction. In Nazi Germany the legislation violated the Jews. Today's illegals have violated the legislation. No one enacted any laws targeting them, their trangressions are entirely of their own accord. But if we are to insist on drawing parallels between the two eras, it could be said that today's illegals share a trait with the Nazis themselves because both groups have invaded countries en mass in violation of national sovereignty.
Jason, everything you correctly criticize about this U.S. Administration's criminalization of minorities (and possibly of perceived 'enemies') could equally be applied to Israel's current treatment of its own indigenous Arab-Israelis, not to mention its humiliation of the Palestinians (Yes, I know, Israel's massive, collective reprisals are intended to reduce the Palestinians' lobbing of pin-prick katyusha rockets at Israel).<br/><br/>Your closing sentence is ominously profound.
Very well said, Mr. Stanley.
They constantly use this label of "criminal" to describe immigrants. These are the same individuals who placed General Flynn in his national security position and may have broken the law. This criminalization is coming from a president and his team that may have colluded with the Russians to become our president. One continues to read reports about all of the business interests and possible ethics violations by the president's team, especially his family now occupying offices right next to the Oval Office. Who criminalizes others and calls then 'snakes'? The 'moral' leader of the free world who has demeaned women with sexual vulgarity, who has refused to release his taxes, and who is now associating himself with strongmen and dictators with criminality in their hands, especially the president of the Philippines. Where is the duplicity? 
The authors of the 14th amendment sought to settle definitively the troublesome issue of American citizenship.  The original Constitution does not list the requirements for citizenship, and most states asserted their authority to fill the gap for their own residents.  Justice Taney, however, tried to override this approach in the Dred Scott decision, by ruling that no African American could attain citizenship status.  The drafters of the 14th amendment repudiated this ruling in section 1, which stipulates that all persons born or naturalized in the US are citizens.<br/><br/>The Trump administration clearly seeks to circumvent the naturalization  part of the amendment, but there are many people in this country who would also  like to repeal birth citizenship.  Referring to cases in which pregnant foreigners enter the country to have their babies, to secure American citizenship for them, these critics paint a dark picture of a widespread conspiracy designed to undermine our culture or security.  This fear belongs to the same strain of paranoia that fuels support for Trump's anti-immigrant campaign.<br/><br/>Birthright citizenship sends a clear message to the world that the US does not define itself in terms of culture, religion, or a family's American heritage.  This liberal conception of the American community qualifies as a tribute to confidence in the strength and appeal of American institutions, as symbolized by the plaque on Lady Liberty.    It is worth defending.
Someone who commits a crime is not necessarily a criminal?  Yes, they are.  The very definition of a criminal is someone who commits a crime.  How sad that the author is actually a professor at my alma mater. (Note, most traffic violations, such as speeding, are not crimes but infractions.  Crimes are transgressions one can be jailed for.)
It amazes me that a country of immigrants and their offspring (America) could so sharply embrace or tolerate the anti-immigrant cult that has taken over the Republican Party and much of the Conservative movement. There is not one person- including the First Peoples groups- that are not the descendants of people who came to this land from somewhere else. In America we are all the children of migrants only differing  in how may generations removed we are from those who came here.<br/><br/>Europe is a different issue in some ways. Many smaller countries with smallish populations feel very vulnerable to migration of dissimilar peoples and rightly fear their culture could be swamped in a few generations of high birthrate migrants. I am not excusing the position these people take, but their discomfort is understandable and has not been properly considered by those in power.<br/><br/>As to criminality, how can someone who embraces the teachings of Christianity- grounded in forgiveness, grace, mercy and redemption - use the law to divide us as a people based upon violation of any law. Even the very Conservative John Roberts can see the stupidity in the argument.
The concept of proportionality to which the author refers is built into the 8th Amendment against unusual punishments.  Surely removal of citizenship to driving just over the speed limit would be a paradigmatic example.  <br/><br/>More importantly, the mean spiritedness of this should shock us all.  
Trumped up charges is the tool of dictatorship and authoritarian
There are degrees of malfeasance:  who among us has not sinned?
Was watching an old Twilight Zone episode today.  "The Monsters are due on Maple street" is classic cold war era sci-fi.<br/><br/>The closing narration by Rod Serling: "The tools of conquest do not necessarily come with bombs and explosions and fallout. There are weapons that are simply thoughts, attitudes, prejudices to be found only in the minds of men. For the record, prejudices can kill, and suspicion can destroy, and a thoughtless frightened search for a scapegoat has a fallout all of its own for the children, and the children yet unborn."
<br/>Prof Stanley:<br/>thank you...<br/>your column could not have arrived one day later.<br/><br/>it is rumored that the mere arrest of any individual,<br/>even when no trial nor conviction results,<br/>subjects the person to the specter of deportation.<br/><br/>given the lopsided likelihood of such actions in the past<br/>being used primarily against peoples of color,<br/>is it any wonder that so many of our citizens rue any<br/>contact of any kind with our so-called justice system?<br/><br/>yet, this practical everyday response,<br/>over time,<br/>leads to a layer of silence and unintended acquiescence.<br/><br/>we desperately need more individuals like your grandmother<br/>to assist us in working our way out of the current<br/>administration's nightmare-tales and strong-armed tactics.<br/><br/>would that the Congress did its constitutional duties and provided<br/>us with an adequate level of funding for the entire justice systems.<br/>until that occurs,<br/>they too,<br/>are directly responsible for the continued practices by an Executive that is rapidly on its way to being out of control.
Beautifully written. Yes. <br/><br/>Resistance is the only moral path.
Regardless of whether it's a proper position to be taken by the government, I am very concerned about the article and most readers' reactions. The author, a student of propaganda, does not provide the readers with the background information that the Obama administration prosecuted this very case for eight years.  The Obama administration shaped the government's position. Trump's administration has been on the case for 100 days. Trump has hardly touched this case. And yet the author uses it to call the president a Hitler like dictator.
I feel angry to read a facile comparison of deporting illegal immigrants back to their home country, with extermination of the Jewish people under Hitler.  Come on, people, stop it already.
The New York Times publishes many nonsensical articles that pretend there is no distinction between illegal and legal immigrants. However, this article makes no distinction between legal and illegal immigrants in America and German Jews who were German citizens, not immigrants.<br/><br/>It’s also difficult to know what to make of the author’s assertion that 5,441 of the 21,263 immigrants ICE arrested between January and March “had no history of violating a law.” Does he mean 5,441 had no criminal record until they were arrested for violating immigration laws? No one has a criminal record until they are arrested for violating a law.
So we see yet again, another hydra-headed side of the monstrosity that is the Trump Administration - as well as the lawless, merciless mindset, sometimes approaching glee, of those that put him there.<br/><br/>God help us - these are the ones most aligned with frequent, overzealous pronouncements of their Christian Faith and Piety! They would be the first to re-crucify Christ all over again, feeling they had done the Lord's work at the end of the day...
"[H]istory suggests that it is rarely constrained to just one group. If we look away when the state brands someone a criminal, who among us then remains safe?"<br/><br/>Unfortunately, people tend to disregard such scary comparisons. During the Great Depression, there was mass deportation of up to "2 million … Mexicans [who] were targeted because of 'the proximity of the Mexican border, the physical distinctiveness of mestizos, and easily identifiable barrios' … 60% were US-born citizens. … one scholar has argued that the process meets modern standards for ethnic cleansing. In 2005, the State of California passed the 'Apology Act for the 1930s Mexican Repatriation Program', apologizing for the state government's role in the repatriation" (<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mexican_Repatriation)" title="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mexican_Repatriation)" target="_blank">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mexican_Repatriation)</a><br/><br/>I have mentioned this several times to my Indian American friends including Trump supporters. Few were fazed by this statistic. Until it comes to you, you ignore. Our defense mechanism is structured that way!
Didn't Trumps third wife break the law by working without a work visa. If you are going to deport naturalized citizens that have broken the law, look no further. Stop attacking brown skinned people. 
The authors allegation that ICE arrests and deports unauthorized immigrants for trivial crimes such as speeding is false. It doesn't arrest them for more serious crimes such as rape, robbery or murder, either. ICE only arrests people for violations of immigration laws or custom laws. None of the 21,362 unauthorized immigrants arrested between January and March were arrest4ed because that have criminal history. They were arrested for being unlawfully present in the United States.
The reason my entire family immigrated to the US wasn't because they were looking for a better life (although we were fortunate to have come before the rise of Hitler). Rather, my great grandfather was expelled from his Austrian-Hungarian community (along with the family) because he had cursed in the synagogue. Anti-Semitic boys were throwing rocks at the temple. They broke glass, and my Great-grandfather's crime was to use God's name in vain. They were forced out of their community and felt that the US was the only option. All of his grandsons (and grandson in laws) became attorneys, with one arguing on more than one occasion for civil rights in the US Supreme Court. Those "criminal" immigrants of today produce productive members of tomorrow's society.
Ah, the old pseudo reductio ad absurdum argument.<br/>One is almost equal to two, and two is almost equal to three, and three is almost equal to four, etc. etc., so soon, one million becomes almost the same as one.<br/><br/>Life is full of distinctions,<br/>Nature is full of distinctions.<br/>No reason for immigration law, or any other law, not to make distinctions.<br/><br/>Foreigners are foreigners.<br/>They are not citizens.<br/><br/>Under American immigration law<br/>(as under the immigration law of nearly every other country).<br/>if a foreigner is here without legal authorization,<br/>he has no right to be here at all,<br/>and he is an illegal alien,<br/>and he can be deported anytime,<br/>regardless whether or not he has committed any "criminal" act,<br/>and regardless whether this or that criminal act is "trivial".<br/><br/>Regardless whether or not some criminal acts are "trivial"<br/>in the context of revocation of citizenship,<br/>the point is irrelevant in the context of deportation of illegal alines.<br/><br/>Maslenjak v. U.S. is a case involving revocation of citizenship.<br/>It is not a deportation case involving someone who never had citizenship.<br/><br/>Regardless whether this or that criminal act is or is not "trivial",<br/>and regardless whether a "trivial" criminal act ought or ought not to be<br/>the basis for revocation of citizenship,<br/>the discussion in that case is irrelevant in the context of deportation for illegal aliens.
But Philippines leader Rodrigo Duterte is welcome here.  <br/><br/>In spite of numerous extra-judicial killings and insulting President Obama, Duterte is nevertheless welcome.  What is troubling is that it may be because of Duterte's deplorable actions that Duterte is being welcomed by Trump, not in spite of it.
Fact- The number 1 cause of crime is law. Law is something we make up so that society functions in a manner we like. It does not come down from Mt. Sinai written on tablets of stone inscribed by the finger of the Almighty. We need to be open to the possibility that our laws need to be tweaked on occasion to achieve the end social result we like. Just saying, "It's against the law", is simply avoiding the issue, which is, does the current law serve our purposes and create the society we want. 
This time, it seems that those who are most in danger do grasp the extremity of the situation; it is those who are not in danger who do not understand, or will not look.
Going over the speed limit is an "infraction" not a crime. The justice should have piped up on that immediately. Of course the racists Trump surrounded himself with now controlling the govt are contemptible in their conflation of the meaning of words and the attempt to manipulate policy through scrambling of semantics. Hispanics that are not bothering anyone, working hard, or running their own businesses as many do should be given a path to citizenship right this very moment. Trump and his minions must be resisted at every opportunity and at any cost!!!
Anyone who has broken our laws, getting into our country, should not get or deserve to gain US citizenship, ever.<br/>Go try this out in other countries in the world and see how far you'd get.<br/>Why do we keep allowing millions of law breakers? We are naive.
Just to be clear. The Jews weren't the only ones to suddenly go "missing" during that dark time in German history.<br/>Anyone who didn't fit into the picture of the "1,000-year Reich" had a way of disappearing, including; Socialists, Communists, Homosexuals, Artists, Intellectuals, Students, non-Aryans, Agnostics, the Mentally and/or Physically afflicted, etc. -- the list was a long one.<br/>They too, are part of the shameful Nazi legacy and narrative that shouldn't be forgotten.<br/>And at this rate, it looks like it very well could happen again.... and here.
When you set out to conflate the victims of the Holocaust with illegal aliens you have already failed the logic test.  There is no comparison.  Similarly, logic fails when you defend untruthful applicants for citizenship.  You are in fact defending the many death camp guards who melted into the chaos after the war, never arrested, tried or convicted – nothing to report, Right?.  The Obama Administration fought the original case up through the lower courts; the Trump administration simply continued the matter at the Supreme Court.  <br/><br/>Never forget, six million dead Jews sure helps score points in your political argument of the minute. Shameful. 
well,it's not too subtle, but you nailed it:<br/><br/>Trump,his positions, his henchmen,and his minions are indistinguishable from Nazis, and they like it that<br/> way because it means they're tough and in charge,a great cover up for their true puny feelings of inadequacy and fear.
I recently discovered that my great-great grandfather was an illegal immigrant. Sincerely hoping they don't come after me!
My college roommate went to Europe after graduation in 1961, eventually ending up in England, getting a job illegally because she didn't have a work Visa, went to graduate school, married an Englishman and stayed.  I would guess she even gave up her American citizenship and became English because she never came back even once.  I wonder if that government would track her down and deport her after all these years!  
The people who invaded our country should be deported. Illegals should feel  love toward the country of their origin. By committing the crime of coming here uninvited it should come as no surprise that one day they will face reckoning.
President Trump and his American version of the Gestapo have me shaking my head in disbelief and dreading what comes next. What a travesty!
This is one of the scarier things I've read yet about this administration, and that's saying a lot. 
The author seems unaware that Donald Trump issued an executive order granted top refugee priority to members of persecuted  religious minorities, which would have saved hundreds of thousands of Jews, if not millions of Jews, had it been in effect during World War II. However, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals blocked that part of the executive order because it would have placed Muslim refugees at a disadvantage in Muslim countries that persecute Jews, Christians and other minorities.
Difficult to think we are being governed by men who have been raised in what I formerly considered "our" nation. Perhaps they, like many religiouslydevout people, were raised in a situation over which they had no choice, such as wealth and the apparent privilege which accompanies that circumstance. <br/><br/>At any rate it appears  they are cut from a different cloth than the majority and while we are a country of laws it again appears they have little concern when members of their group transgress. <br/><br/>Time after time it has been noted there appears to be a different standard those of means apply to themselves and other members of their "class" which eliminates 90% of our citizenry. I am almost sure they do not in any way consider themselves "criminal" rather people who seek to change laws which could mitigate against their financeial interests and to do so they need to win control through our elective system, which thanks to "Citizens United", they have managed to accomplish.<br/><br/>Mr Trump and his coterie see nothing wrong with the way they tilt the table and cite our laws to back them up. They are not criminal but they have little regard for ethics which although unwritten we all understand.<br/><br/>However socially skewed, since 1832 we, have accepted the observation of then NY Senator William Marcy "to the victor belong the spoils" and today they are sitting on the throne.  
We took full advantage of those illegal immigrants since people started over staying their visas or people crossing Mexican border for low paid jobs. Americans employed them where no blue workers will work. our food on the table comes due to their hard labor in the filed. Many small businesses employed them with cash payments to avoid government taxes. There were instances even when many senators, and congressmen used them at home for house hold work. We had been fighting drug wars for several decades but no solution is at cite. No harsher military actions had been able to stop it because it is very lucrative business as long as the demand is increasing. Similarly, no wall can stop illegal immigrant when it is a life and death question - called human rights. we have seen it in Germany and will see it in USA if Trump administration gets its way. Solution? Empathy, education, tolerance, patience and global knowledge by hard core trump supporters including the President himself. To tell you frankly, these hard core Trump supporters have been behaving exactly the way Natsies behaved during the second world war.
This opinion and associated "progressive" comments illustrate the fact free nature of "progressive" thought.  It is a fact that there is a difference between legal and illegal immigration, a fact our "progressives" like to ignore.  Most of the time the "progressives" take a "fact" and twist it so it is not recognizable with their interpretation of the "fact", in this case they just pretend the fact doesn't exist.
Mr. Stanley's misquote of candidate Trump, cast doubt on the remaining information presented. Though I agree there should be constraints on deportations, one cannot agree with an argument based on misquotes. Please, NYT ensure your reporters/writers use accurate quotes.
I have a confession to make.  I speed. A lot. I've also been known to park in the wrong place downtown for conveniene, then just pay the fine.  It rains a lot in Seattle and I hate walking to far in 45 degree downpours.  My point?  In the Trump voters view I am a criminal worthy of deportation.... except one tiny little thing.  It's my British ancestry, my lily white skin and my perfect west coast American accent.  So I have no worries, though I must say if I tan too dark or speak spanish in the wrong circles, that may change.  I suspect German or French wouldn't offend though.  Most of them have white skin too.
Still on this illegal immigration kick I see. This is and always has been a smoke screen in tough economic times. We don't have an illegal immigrant problem. We have an illegal Administration problem.
The Supreme Court case stated here has very little to do with illegal immigrants.  It has to do with immigrants with legal status trying to obtain citizenship.<br/><br/>Being an illegal immigrant is inherently a crime (regardless of the severity) and they cannot become citizens without being legalized first.  What is at issue is the permanent prevention of obtaining citizenship because of past "crimes".  Under the Trump legal interpretation, any trivial infraction that would never show up on a criminal record is cause to reject a person for citizenship.  This means any illegal immigrant who takes the arduous steps to become legal would never be allowed to try and obtain citizenship.  This also means that anyone who entered this country as a legal immigrant and forgot that they got a parking ticket 15 years ago would also be prevented from becoming a citizen (or having their hard earned reward revoked).  It criminalizes simple infractions for naturalized citizens and not for those who are born into citizenship.<br/><br/>It is this action of revoking citizenship for minor violations that is mirroring the tactics used by the Gestapo and Nazi Germany. That it would be attempted today shows us just how much we never learn from history.
The New office in DHS, of VOICE,<br/>Victims of Immigration Crime Engagement,<br/>Call them up and report that Aliens have landed in your back yard, in a flying saucer, and have abducted your cat, or whatever you want to report. Just tie up their phone lines..
It's despicable to compare America to the Nazis.<br/>1) Being sent back to Mexico is not equivalent to being sent to Auschwitz.<br/>2) The courts are not going to allow Trump to deport citizens.<br/>3)  People who are in the US do not have any right to stay here.<br/>4) It is highly unlikely any significant number of those here illegally will ever be deported.<br/>5) The Democrats during the entire Obama administration deported plenty and did not lift a finger to make the illegal legal, so stop pretending this is solely a Trump problem.
You hate Trump.  We get it. Trivializing the Holocaust is getting old.
I thought the question of which people in this country illegally were criminals and should be deported should evolve around the  question of which illegal immigrants were destructive to our society -- not who had a traffic ticket.  Russian Mafia -- out!  Islamic terrorists -- out!  Person who went 60 miles an hour in a 55 miles per hour zone -- you've got to be kidding.  Like Jesus said, the one without sin should cast the first stone.
I don't like Trump, but preceding the opinion piece with "The Trump administration should not have the power to revoke the citizenship of 'anyone they want'" is somewhat unfair.  The prosecution was commenced, the petition for certiorari was filed, the opposition to the petition was filed, and the petition was granted during Obama's Administration.<br/><br/>There were some members of the Court, including Ginsburg, who thought the petitioner's admittedly false statement was material.  If SCOTUS rules in her favor, the prosecution may be able to prove to the satisfaction of a jury that if she had not lied about her husband's service in a Bosnian Serb military unit which had committed atrocities, her application would have been denied.
What is most troublesome to me is what is to happen to those who are picked up? Are they immediately deported, or are they slated to become residents of the new private prisons we've been hearing about?<br/><br/>It's not surprising that someone would want to make a profit off these people, but we should not allow them to be exploited before they are returned to their own country.<br/><br/>I hate what we're seeing done in our name, and all because a very small group of Americans have been taught to hate those not like them. What a sorry lot.
Equally disturbing is that Trump is a criminal himself, by his own admission. All in favor of deporting Donald Trump say "Aye".
Is this a trick question. Pick anyone from the President on down in his administration.  Seems a case could be made for sedition given his statements about the Courts.
Mr. Trump should remember that his grandfather was kicked out of Germany for being a criminal (draft dodger). If the US had a Trump-like immigration policy, at the time his grandfather arrived here, then his father would have been booted out of this country. 
To all of you who don't understand the conflating of "illegal" immigrants with Nazi Germany,  I suggest you read the following book:<br/>After They Closed the Gates by Libby Garland.  <br/><br/>She writes about the closing of American immigration from 1921 to 1965.  Although she focuses on the effect of the new laws on Jews, it is a real eye opener about the history of immigration in the 20th century.  It seems that nothing has changed in the past hundred years except for the ethnic groups (not necessarily countries of origin) of the people being excluded.  The reasons are the same and, we had thought, long since proven wrong.
Thank you Mr. Stanley, for an incredibly insightful and sensitive opinion about such despicable behavior.  I can only hope that your column will resonate with many who do not fully see the danger that the current president and his administration pose to our society, our values, our very democracy.  Their words and actions are insidious, and, like earlier in history, may only be fully realized when it is too late, unless everyone becomes much more mindful; they are the poisonous snakes, and as with so many previous examples, 45 refers to others as he actually knows himself to be.
This is why there can be no compromise with a leftist. As soon as a consensus is reached and rhetorical ground is yielded, the goal-posts get moved. Deportation is not a "punishment" in the legal sense to begin with, which is why is court procedures are completely different than criminal procedures. But somewhere along the way, leftists started arguing "Why are we deporting law-abiding people, we should prioritize criminals first." The mainstream agrees to some extent, but then the argument becomes "Oh, but we didn't mean people that committed simple traffic violations when we said 'law-abiding'. Then it becomes "Well, no we meant not for DUI's either, even if citizens are put at significant risk by the behavior, we meant just felonies". Then it was: "Oh not all felonies, just violent felonies". Soon, it will be "cruel and unusual" to try to deport murderers, even though deportation never had anything to do with criminality in the first place. 
The Trump Administration is a crime against human intelligence.  
The NYTimes always implicitly holds that illegal "immigrants" have a right to remain in this country. But they don't, in this or any other country.
The issue in Nazi Germany was the arbitrary dictatorial power given to the head of state. Once that happens - as it did in the USSR, Cuba, North Korea, China, Venezuela, Zimbabwe, et al - then anything goes.<br/><br/>The US is moving in that direction step by step, and it doesn't matter which party controls the Executive. Every POTUS who wants to be an "activist" sovereign has moved the administration of this country toward the same end as a tyrant/dictator/monarch. This is as true under Trump as it was under Obama, Bush, Clinton, FDR, LBJ, etc. <br/><br/>We used to have a document that circumscribed the power of both the Executive and the Legislative branches. However, as they are wont to do, the politicians elected to these two branches - and the SCOTUS jurists who agree with them - have enjoyed well over a century of ways of sidestepping and evading what the Constitution spells out.<br/><br/>Throw them all out. Quickly.  
This ejection of immigrants for vehicular misdeeds, together with the fascist slogan, "America First", should send klaxons of warning through our population. Brannon and Gorky may not be in the forefront these days, but their political brand is...a white, Protestant, America.
Please stop with the irrational, hyperbolic comparisons to 1930's Germany, they could not be more inaccurate and dishonest.  
It's interesting to see that the comments section of this article is being subjected to massive trolling by right-wingers trying to simulate some kind of popular revulsion against immigrants.  Trolling of this kind obliterates the natural trajectory of discussion between citizens and turns public forums into unsafe spaces for genuine dialogue.  The right has no understanding or concern for this, but the Times and its ordinary readers should.  It was just this kind of manipulation of opinion that led to the NAZI success being so vehemently denied as relevant by the trolls attacking this page today...
Everything described here is true and troubling.   But realize there is no constituency in this country for illegal immigrants.  This fact is the main reason Trump was elected.<br/><br/>Trump might make a West Virginia coal miner feel good by sending him down into a toxic pit while he at the the same time eliminates his health care insurance and the coal miner will thank Trump for it and vote for him again, as long as that coal miner knows the gays, the minorities and the illegals are getting hit worse.<br/><br/>This is the essence of the mentality of the Trump voter; screw me all you want, as long as every one else is screwed worse.  
Our checks and balances work. We should remain vigilant to this Administration's proclivities to do harm, but I have great confidence that our institutions are greater than any man or woman.<br/><br/>Here's to SCOTUS. Well done.
The fact that immigration violations are civil (not criminal) is used to deny lawyers in immigration court even to children, as well as a raft of other protections afforded criminal defendants.  So if you want to call immigration law violators "criminals", you must also call for immigration courts to meet all standards of criminal courts.
The comparisons in this article are absurd. Jews in Germany were citizens of Germany, and their citizenship was revoked on the basis of their religion.<br/><br/>Sane Americans want to remove people who are not here legally. In other words, those who violated the law. Perhaps Germany could have stopped speeding, and stopped there. They had other motives. We wish to stop having people cross our borders illegally. We do that by "undoing" the specific crime committed- namely by removing those who came illegally.<br/><br/>Deciding what offense is severe enough to warrant deportation is absurd when one is here illegally. Perhaps it is relevant when one is talking about a crime committed by a legal resident alien (ie a green-card holder who drives 60 in a 55 vs a green-card holder who drives drunk vs a green-card holder who rapes someone).<br/><br/>We are a country. We have borders. They need to be enforced. We have unemployed Americans. If they do not want to fill vacant jobs, force them to or cut off their welfare checks.<br/><br/>But comparing deporting people here illegally to what my grandparents went through in Europe is absurd.
That a mere parking ticket in Switzerland would spell a families complete destruction which included expulsion, ex-communication, torture and worse is amply disturbing.  However today matters are worse and worse surprisingly in many parts of America.
We have become such a cruel people, but I think it comes from fear and pain. The fear is fed to us - and has been since 9/11- as a tool to manipulate us. The pain, I think, comes from living in a country that not only will not help and protect its citizens, but demeans us for even suggesting such a thing. Our government has been bought by oligarchs and corporations, who get rich at our expense. And when we have so little compared to people in other nations, we can't help but fear that someone else will take the tiny bit that's ours. And so we become cruel and vicious, buy guns and put up walls, and demonize those we fear might have a job when we don't. It doesn't matter that the jobs were taken by robots, or that the corporations could spare some of their fat profits to pay living wages -- they use their money and influence to convince us that the problem is in us, in each other, not in them. It's the saddest thing I have ever seen. 
As a prosecutor I was taught to always refer to the defendant as defendant, never by his name.  Public defenders always referred to their clients as Mr. So and So.   In Colorado it is illegal to refer to defendants as animals, something I suspect is true in many states. Labels have the power to dehumanize.  Courts know this.  Our so called president is using derogatory labels to color our perception of our neighbors, friends, coworkers and spouses.  Don't let him succeed.
Trump, with his own ill-considered words is negating everything he says his Homeland Security Department is doing with "extreme vetting." If the immigrants who have been graciously allowed into our country have been vetted why are they also "criminal aliens." His words can be interpreted any way his followers want to do it. When people used to be circumspect with their words before are now just quite open with their hatred for anything out of the ordinary. <br/><br/>Then we have the propensity for casual violence in this country and the easy availability of hundreds of millions of guns. An incendiary combination that is waiting to explode. We need thoughtful people to get together to fight this disease or else we will be swept up in it.
Let me start by saying I oppose the Trump Adminsistration.  But misleading use of terms only undermines the writer's argument. There are two misconceptions here which mislead the reader.  First, the Administration is not deporting "immigrants," it is deporting "deportable aliens."  These terms are clearly defined in the Immigration and Nationality Act. To equate deportable aliens with immigrants insults immigrants. Second, deportation, as practiced under U.S. law, is not a punishment.  To send a Frenchman to France or an Australian citizen to Australia, is not punishment unless they have a well founded fear of persecution, in which case they would a third type of person clearly defined in the law, a refugee.  With the exception of convicted felons, deportable aliens are given the opportunity for voluntary deportation which allows hem to settle their affairs in the United States before leaving.  Only convicted felons and those who did not avail themselves of voluntary deportation are deported at the expense of the Government.
"Department of Homeland Security devoted to helping 'victims of crimes committed by criminal aliens.' "<br/>Good.  It's important folks understand who are committing what crimes - regardless of the number. Innocent lives are still devastated.<br/><br/>"In his announcement of his run for office, he spoke of Mexican immigrants<br/>as 'rapists.'  "<br/>Actually he spoke of Mexican immigrants who were rapists.<br/><br/>"While President Barack Obama set deportation priorities by making a distinction between undocumented immigrants with serious criminal<br/> convictions and everyone else,..."<br/>Democrats, please do vocally propose this dichotomy to the electorate in the next election cycle.  There's illegal immigrants with serious criminal convictions and the rest of us.  That's the universe alright...<br/>BTW, in  the eyes of the Democratic Party leadership, apparently the fraudulent use of a social security number, a felony,  is not enough to qualify as a serious criminal conviction.  You probably know the story there,  but let's save it for an important occasion. 
With respect to the Supreme Court case cited, most readers and the writer, seem to have overlooked the fact that it was President Obama's DoJ that arrested and tried the woman whose case was heard by the Supreme's.
Those who discuss criminals in America tend to be unforgiving, extremely so.<br/><br/>Yet Americans themselves tend to be forgiving, a nation of second chances.<br/><br/>The idea that a good life is entirely poisoned by one wrong choice is standard among those who denounce crime and demand punishment, but it is very un-American talking to normal people.<br/><br/>Then we add to that the question of exile. Throw them out for a mistake. No matter what else they are, no matter who they help, no matter what they contribute, just that one thing means to discard them. That is un-American.<br/><br/>Yet those who seek "compromise" seem often to suggest that we draw the line at "criminals." People are not just criminal or not criminal. <br/><br/>Most people break at least one law every day, a traffic law or something similar. Go one mile over the speed limit? They won't ticket for that, right? Jaywalk? This is tax season, and just what spirit did most of us bring to that exercise?<br/><br/>Oh, but "major crime." Really? Close exam would show that line is whatever is wanted by whoever draws the line.<br/><br/>Open borders won't work. It is also not the only alternative to acting like total jerks.
Astounding, isn't it, that almost no Democratic lawmakers have challenged him on this weaselly definition of 'criminal' to include just about anybody.<br/><br/>And no wonder.  Democratic party orthodoxy holds that there's no difference between US citizens born abroad and immigrants here without permission, except that we just haven't gotten around to punching the tickets for the latter.  IF we start talking about who's a criminal and who isn't, next thing you know we'll be admitting that some might be deported. Trump took this free pass, and filled it in the way he wants.<br/><br/>(Irony is, he's not going to deport much of anybody.  He just wants to terrify millions of people into the shadows.  For GOP employers, a win-win!)
Touching and thoughtful Thank you!
" . . . . . someone who commits a crime is not necessarily a criminal."<br/><br/>What torturous logic.
First, I have to say the young girl at left in the picture has a striking resemblance to Rachel Dratch. I can't help wondering if there is family connection.<br/><br/>As to the sad theme of the article, I think the author has a point; however, there is little practical advice on how to effectively combat the trend or diffuse the hate politics involved.
This problem endures because Congress had failed for decades to write a realistic Immigration Law.  The GOP controlled Congress is incapable of writing a coherent law to address this overdue issue.<br/>The second prong of the problem is human's love to hate the "other" that vermin caused all my problems.  If we could destroy the vermin all would be wonderful.  Nazi Germany honed this anger into the final solution, although it has existed and will continue to exist all over the world.   
I am disgusted with the conflation of the plight of the Jews in Germany in the '30s and during WWII with illegal immigrants in the United States. The Jews in Germany for the most part were born there, and grew up there, and were ultimately sent to death camps. <br/><br/>Illegal aliens in the US came of their own accord, knowing they were breaking our laws, but taking a gamble. 
Its an insult to compare the bureaucratic machinations for determining which crimes meet the standard to have an illegal border invader sent home to what the Nazis did. You lose your moral high ground when you stoop that low. 
To the best of my knowledge, by law, being in this country illegally is not a crime, but a misdemeanor. Those here illegally are not by that definition criminals. But that is not the question.<br/>The question is whether of not, according to the law, people in this country illegally are to be deported. If the law says that is what is to be done, then that is what is to be done. If laws are not to be obeyed, then why do we have laws? Are we not supposed to be ruled by law not whim, and are our public officials not therefore obligated to enforce those laws? If they do not enforce those laws are they not at fault and derelict in their duties? I believe that they are.
Where are the Democrats making the moral and financial arguments agaisnt these policies? <br/><br/>Democrats, the Where's Waldo of politics. 
This constant suggestion that enforcing our immigration laws is akin to Nazism is preposterous. Illegals are illegals. They are not entitled to make our laws on immigration for us. People  are not "in this country without status." They are breaking our immigration laws. The punishment for doing so should nearly always be deportation. Let Mexicans and other Latino nations take care of their own unskilled underclass instead of shipping them here. 
footnote to my last post<br/><br/>therefore we need heavenly divine love to come down to the earth and begin to save humans from a system out to turn them all into criminals
So, who is hiring all these illegal residents?  Americans with farming, construction and other businesses, that's who.  Such hypocrisy!  If Republicans fined employers for hiring non-citizens, non-citizens would not  be working for American businesses. It is simple. But no one ever said governing was simple, except of course, for our astonished president. 
Under current immigration law - which we can change if we want to -- being in the country without legal authorization is sufficient grounds to make someone leave. No further crime needs to be committed. If I were to enter another country and never leave, if told to leave I'd have a pretty weak defense pointing out that I'd never been convicted of any crimes while there and certainly hadn't committed any major crimes. I'd suggest to anyone visiting any country other than their own, especially if they have no legal right to be there, that they follow all laws carefully while there, including the traffic laws. (German Jews, of course, had every right to be there.)
Every country is different, and has different degrees of cohesiveness. If the people of Switzerland want to revoke the citizenship of naturalized foreigners and their descendants so be it.<br/><br/>Humankind has been tribal since its inception. People just feel more comfortable with people who look like them and who share the same values.<br/>We pretend it is different here in the US, but in reality each "tribe" is  clustered together. Blacks, Indians, Chinese, Europeans, Spanish people, etc. they all tend to cluster together and feel alienated with the others. 
If we're going to be revoking anybody's citizenship, let's start with Trump.
Illegal immigrants are citizens of foreign countries. 
"people who by their nature are insensitive to society’s norms, drawn to violate the law by self-interest or malice."<br/><br/>You just described the entire Trump administration.  Here is the basis of most of their millions--or billions.  This isn't simply a kleptocracy, though, and any correlation that can be drawn between these animals and the Nazis is legitimate and necessary.  This IS the way fascism works.  The people at the top must share a criminal mindset, a belief in their own superiority, entitlement, and exclusivity, and they must constantly demonstrate a psychopathic disdain for the rights of others.  Then they go about separating out different groups to be Others.  Supporters look the other way as their neighbors disappear, then move into their empty houses.  Never underestimate the human proclivity for cowardice, especially in service to self-interest.
There's a bit of difference between deporting economic migrants who arrive illegally, sending them back to their home countries, and rounding up citizens on cocked up pretexts and sending them to their deaths in concentration camps. So there's that.
Donald Trump's love of whipping up mob frenzy, his public espousal of violence, his failure to swiftly and sincerely disavow the allegiance of white supremacists, his deplorable criticisms of a free press and a free judiciary, his blatant cashing in on the office of the presidency and his adulation of dictators and tyrants are all sickening. I am not ashamed to be a citizen of the United States, because my country is far more than the unqualified and unstable person holding the office of president right now, but I am deeply ashamed that so many of my fellow citizens find anything admirable in this man. 
The voting pubilc's anger over illegal immigration was a major factor that put Trump in office.  For many decades US immigration laws were not enforced.   People got a free pass if they could get in.   The pressure to "do something" on the problem built up after Reagan's amnesty and what happened was a bunch of executive orders from Obama basically allowing an illegal who got in and didn't commit any major violent crimes, to stay.<br/><br/>Many American voters want our immigration laws enforced.  To compare foreign nationals being sent home to a non-violent country to  native born Jews murdered by their own Nazi government is insulting.  <br/><br/>Why do immigrants get to pick and choose which laws they follow?<br/><br/>There is no nation without a border.  Does this nation have borders or not?  There are 7.5 billion humans in the world now.  At least 10% would come immediately if they could.  The world population is just too big to take in everyone.  People need to stay home and fix their countries.  Just like America needs to fix this country and take care of our own citizens.<br/><br/>And by the way, I did not vote for Trump.
Only a "philosopher" at an ivy league training ground for plutocrats could obfuscate what " illegal immigration" means - it means entry through unlawful methods.  Unlawful means a criminal act of whatever degree.  According to this fool though, jaywalking is punishable while unlawful entry is not.  You may receive a summons for the one-fingered, constitutionally-protected salute to a cop, but you get a pass if you paid a smuggler to sneak you through border crossings.  On the other hand, idiocy like this helps drive more and more voters into the growing swell of the dissatisfied, the disrespected and the degraded.  Our army grows.  One can always count on the left's ability to bring about the polar opposite of their intent.  The implosion of their political party home, just underway after the typically stupid comments of their newly elected hater-in-chief who clearly favors infanticide over bridge-building.  Deliciously ironic; spectacularly idiotic - even for a party chair in the unhinged mode of Howard Dean.  Let's have more.
Just another step to making America into a fascist state:  there is no one, other than babies who can't speak, who has never lied; therefore, everyone is guilty at the very least of this transgression.  The government is giving itself authority to exhile anyone, absolutely anyone, they wish.  First they'll get rid of the recent immigrants (except the white people because they want more of those), then dark-skinned citizens, then Asians, then gays, then atheists, then anyone who is not white and Christian, then anyone who dares to question the party line.  Welcome to Gilead.
Most Americans don't think of unauthorized immigrants as criminals. They think of them as people who are unlawfully residing in the United States. America doesn't punish unauthorized immigrants for violating immigration laws, even though illegally entering the country and working without authorization are felony offenses for which they could be fined and/or incarcerated. Instead, America simply requires them to stop violating immigration laws and return to their home countries.  Comparing this to this to the Nazi Holocaust is absurd. 
Too many Americans - I call them Trump Nazi's  - are unaware of the parallels between the Trump administration and Nazi Germany. The parallels are real and terrifying. The Nazi's started early, making Jews, gays and anyone else they did not like "other," and slowly convinced the German people that these people were not human and a threat to them and their country. Thus came the concentration camps and the slaughter.<br/><br/>It did not happen overnight, but was a careful and meticulous plan developed and implemented over years. Trump has only been in office 100 days and already he is ahead of the Nazi's. It is not a joke. It is a tragedy and a horror show, and no one - not even the NY Times (the LA Times has taken the strongest editorial stance thus far) - is taking it seriously enough. We had better wake up, and fast.
If you're in the country illegally, you're a criminal.
They said they finally wanted to do what the court had missed doing all these years: to get rid of all Jews with criminal records. <br/><br/>A gas chamber is a far cry from mere deportation.  The parallels are more than just a little far apart.  But nice try. 
Donald Trump's military draft dodging German grandfather came to America evading German Bavarian criminal prosecution. Whether or not Trump's Scottish mother come to America legally is unknown. Melania Trump's questionable legal immigration status has never been carefully clarified and cleared.<br/><br/>Unlike the Holocaust which occurred in foreign countries with foreigners acting against foreigners, both the holocausts of humanity denying African enslavement and equality defying African Jim Crow involved action by Americans against other Americans in America.<br/><br/>Black African Americans have  long been the favored designated criminal caste class in America.  See 'The New Jim Crow"  by Michelle Alexander;  'The Condemnation of Blackness' by  Khalil Muhammad;  'Locking Up Our Own' by James Foreman, Jr.
The continual comparing of Trump and his stance on illegal immigration with Nazi Germany and the treatment of jews does a disservice to your cause and is embarrassing to those with a grasp of history.  
Quite telling. Liberals go nuts when Sean Spicer compares Assad to Hitler. But of course it is fine to compare Trump to Hitler. 
The problem in the 1930's was that the real thugs and criminals were in charge of the German government.  The problem today is that the President of the United States is selectively borrowing from the Nazi's playbook.  Pick an obvious target - dark-skinned people, Muslims, Mexicans -  then beef up "security"  and give them special powers to arrest, detain, and terrorize;  create a climate of hate and fear;   ratchet-up the climate of fear with sabre rattling against other countries; cozy-up to other fascist thugs, such as Putin, Erdogan, and Dutarte;  be ready, at a moment's notice to declare Martial Law.<br/>The big difference between then and now is that now we have the internet.  In the thirties the Fascists used the Radio very effectively to disseminate their message.  The internet appears to have a greater potential to polarize, to magnify differences, and to mobilize ideological factions.  Where we go with this depends on the American people.
Why are progressive Americans fearful of comparing Trump to Hitler  &amp; radical ,Republican Conservatives to the third Reich.Trump has successfully used Hitler tactics to gain the support of the ultra right &amp; win the election . Bannon is his Goering.The only difference is the Jews are not necessarily, the scapegoats, &amp; have been replaced by the Mexicans. &amp; Muslims. It is the Mexicans that are the rapists, drug Dealers, &amp; animals., and Muslims potential terrorists. generalizations are running amok.<br/>If it looks like a Skunk &amp; smells like a Skunk it is a Skunk, or in this case a Nazi.   
This is a slippery slope piece but the knife cuts in two directions. While I take the authors point can he not see that for too long we let the pendulum swing in the other direction?<br/>In order for a country to function it needs laws and those laws need to be enforced. When they are not or when obeying the law becomes arbitrary you wind up in our current situation. One of my kids friends once asked me when we were discussing the illegal immigrant situation, "OK they get to break our laws, They are here in violation of the law, they use other peoples SSA numbers to work and they drive without license or insurance. Which laws do I get to ignore". When I told him that they did indeed do that and no he didn't get any laws he as a citizen could ignore he felt as he put it that kinda sucks.<br/>He was right it does. 
The difference between the "criminal" undocumented and our corrupt, liar-in-chief?  THEY got "caught."  HE'S still walking free.  Oh, and THEY have much better morals.
"Who is a criminal"?  How about the buffoon sitting in the oval office?  Does treason count as a crime?
And once Trump has finished with the Mexican, he with turn to the criminal African Americans.  He has already suggested that maybe he should send troops into Chicago to control the violence.
This is why we hold the second amendment very dear. Protect yourself kids, it's not just right wing wackos that should be prepping.
Snakes ???? OMG..... how very, very sad.... how very, very disgusting....<br/>the snake will someday welcome trump with open arms.... for eternity...
Comparing the enforcement of our borders to the Holocaust is revolting. but typical of what we expect from the increasingly more extreme NYT. Shameful, but to be expected from this crowd.
If you want a solid understanding of Nazi Germany, the rise of Adolph Hitler, and the forces that powered both, read "Ominous Parallels" by Leonard Peikoff.
Let's not dance around the issue.  Trump is riding a wave of racism to restore the nation to its mythical whiteness in exactly the same way that every despot uses "the other" to make it seem like its OK.  Sessions and ICE aren't going after MS-13.  No, that would be dangerous.  It's much easier to pick off these brown people at the workplace, or grab the DACA kid or their parents.  Hell, they can even jackboot into a courthouse as they do in NJ to pick off those waiting to testify in court against real criminals.  <br/><br/>Our President postures, struts and brays about the criminal element and simultaneously breaks bread with Rodrigo Duterte, a man who openly authorized the extrajudicial killing of drug addicts and dealers... to shoot them down like mad dogs in the street.  There is no veneer on this.  President Trump must be impeached before he drags the nation into the gutter of history.
Boarder = one who comes on board, or rents space in a dwelling.<br/>Border = the edge of something, or what people cross, legally or illegally, to seek life in a new country.<br/><br/>Please, please please. So sick of seeing intelligent people screw this up.<br/>Next week, kiddies, there, they're and their.<br/>Which and that can wait until grad school.
I’m not surprised that the author was able to write a book titled "How Propaganda Works”.  She seems to have used this knowledge by conflating Jews who were being sent to death chambers with economic migrants.   Why have Mexicans and Central Americans come here illegally?  There are relatively safe areas in Mexico where they could have moved (such as the Yucatan) and where they could go now. 
This is incredible!!!<br/><br/>"To test the severity of that position", to revoke the citizenship of someone "who made even trivial misstatements in their naturalization proceedings,”, "Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr., confessed to a crime — driving 60 miles an hour in a 55-mile-an-hour zone many years ago without being caught. He then asked if a person who had not disclosed such an incident in his citizenship application could have his citizenship revoked. The lawyer answered, yes. There was “indignation and incredulity” expressed by the members of the Court."<br/><br/>Instead of indignation and incredulity, the court should have kicked out this lawyer with a vacuous mind forthright from the courtroom and perhaps even hold him in contempt of court for wasting court's valuable time!!
I agree with this article in principle, but differ on one important point: deporting illegal immigrants who have absolutely NO legal right to set up legal residence in the U.S. is reasonable &amp; well within the rights of the law. They knowingly circumvented our laws when they entered and cut in front of those who are patiently waiting in line to immigrate legally.<br/><br/>When the article states: "To drag someone out of the life they have painstakingly created over many years, for something as petty as traffic violations or shoplifting, is a gross violation of the proportionality principle — that the punishment should fit the crime".<br/><br/>This kind of liberal rationalization (along with the hysterical mantra "Don't separate families!!" drives me crazy. If they wanted to create a life here, they should have followed the rules and come here LEGALLY.
All of us stole land.
“the government may revoke the citizenship of Americans who made even trivial misstatements in their naturalization proceedings,” including not disclosing a criminal offense of any kind, even if there was no arrest. <br/><br/>The Constitution forbids 'unusual punishment'. Yet here, an individual is expected to admit to an offense that was never judged as a crime? According to the lawyer arguing this case, every time I break a speed limit, I am obliged to send a check to the State. And failure to comply can lead to expulsion from the country.<br/><br/>What a sense of disgust to read about arguments in front of the Supreme Court that appear to put us on a par with the practices of Nazi Germany.<br/><br/>How can we have sunk so low in the space of 100 days?
Agreed.<br/>But with nativists, racists, and jingoists, none of these cogent arguments matters.
Back in 1963 late at night in the San Fernando Valley on the San Diego Freeway I put my New Plymouth Sport Fury Convertible with the Golden Commando engine through its paces.  Unfortunately there was a patrol car in the same area.  By the time they stopped me I had exited the freeway and was on Van Nuys Blvd.  they claim they clocked me at 100mph and I was pulling away.  Those days the freeway was wide open.  Not like today.  So they just wrote me a ticket which I paid, dearly!  According to this article that indiscretion might get me exported after stripping me of my citizenship for the violation if targeted.<br/><br/>Is this the way it started in Nazi Germany?  Reckless driving can cause an accident.  Reckless policies can destroy a nation.
This is Trump and his administration's twisted, dehumanizing way of trying to rid America of as many non-whites as possible.
People applauded while Trump referred to immigrants as snakes.  But we can't say they are deplorable can we?
When is Trump ever going to give that press conference he promised to explain how Melania got citizenship?
First they came for the communists, then the homosexuals, then the catholics. When they came for me there was no one left to protest.<br/>This has happened before.
"you are what I say you are".   Heaven help us, I think we are in real trouble.
When you want to take away rights you do it in small increment steps starting with a group of people who are loathed and resented by the general public.  In natzi Germany the target was Jews and Gypsies.  Here in the USA illegal immigrants are the obvious target.  The public has always resented illegal immigrants and view all of them as criminals so no one expects any push back against questionable methods in dealing with them.<br/><br/>The problem is that once you start crossing those lines it gets easier and easier to push boundaries that you normally wouldn't cross.  In Germany natzi scientists went from using Jews as labor to killing them and performing horrific experiments on them.  <br/><br/>President Obama was right to focus on removing those who were guilty of violent crimes.  Until Congress decides to address our immigration policies that have led to our current crisis this is an easily enforcible line that ensures we don't cross any boundaries that we can't walk back from.
It is beyond offensive to analogize the rounding up and murder of Jews in Nazi Germany with an effort to deport people who have no legal right to be here -- people who violate the law by their continued presence in this country. It is also flawed reasoning to suggest that the Supreme Court's view of the standard the government needs to meet to revoke naturalization has anything to do with the way in which it decides which illegal immigrants it chooses to deport.
Pres. Chump wants to be a dictator.<br/>It is as simple as that.<br/>Hence his love for the military.<br/>"The price of liberty is eternal vigilance" against Chump.
This brings to mind also eugenics, where the genetic qualities of a race can be improved by the control of human mating, where the converse is not allowing certain people to mate.  Those individuals who are not thought to possess qualities that the state deems correct can be forced to become sterilized.  Maybe almost unheard of now, but in the early 20th century, this was a powerful force in this country (and then later in Germany with Hitler).  A criminal could be someone who is deaf or blind.  This current administrations's hard line could become even harder.
Is it appropriate for China to populate Tibet to control it, and overwhelm the native population?  No.  It's the same for us in the US to use the law, and enforcement of the law, to not be overwhelmed by non-citizens.<br/><br/>It is the right of Americans to determine WHO enters and stays in this country.  What about the rights to maintain a country's borders?  And customs and lifestyle?  And to know the real identity and risk/compatibility of anyone who enters.  <br/><br/>And part of that is to deny the entry or stay of anyone who has broken any of those immigration laws.  There are MILLIONS of legal immigrants and naturalized citizens who followed the rules and laws.  <br/><br/>Your Op-Ed spits in the face of the law abiding legal immigrant and naturalized citizen, and US born citizens, and destabilizes our country.  <br/><br/>Stop printing this pro-illegal immigrant nonsense, NYT.
Although there certainly must have been German Jews who chose not to emigrate because they found it so hard to believe that they would be targeted for death, the fact is that about half the German Jews did leave Germany.  While not all German Jews realized the danger they were in as early as my grandparents did when they worked to get their children out of Germany as soon as Hitler came to power and then had to wait almost to the end to get a place in the US for themselves, the stories I grew up with are different than what Stanley heard from his grandmother and I believe are more reflective of the actual facts. Also keep in mind that the places where the Jewish population lost the greatest percentage of its people were countries like Poland and the Ukraine and the Baltic countries. They didn't expect an invasion and their Jewish citizens were also the least likely to receive a welcome in places like the US which discriminated against Eastern Europeans even more than it did against German Jews. 
As in so many other such treatises, the author chooses to conflate immigrants who have entered legally with those who have not. There is all the difference in the world to observers without an ideological ax to grind. Whatever you may think of ICE tactics, the "21,362 immigrants" arrested by them this year had chosen to break the law in order to enter and to remain here.<br/><br/>And more perniciously, he plays the Nazi card, using the tragic history of his own family. What comparison is he going to have left if a US government really started to round people up in order to send them off to death camps?
Trump is free to establish his own deportation criteria, he is not required to follow Obama's practices.  People in this country illegally are criminals and they can be deported even if they have no so-called additional serious criminal convictions.  <br/><br/>I don't see a parallel between what is happening now with illegal immigration and the plight of the German Jews.  The latter were natural-born citizens of Germany who paid a terrible price for their religious status.  The current situation involves aliens who have overstayed their visas or have entered this country illegally.  If caught by ICE, their fate is deportation.  There are no gas chambers, crematoria, firing squads or yellow stars.
Gee, suppose groping females was an offense warranting<br/>deportation, or lying in a public funded venue? Or claiming<br/>your roots were Swedish ( Trump) when they were German<br/>(Trumpf.)? Gee.
I wonder what would happen if I (or any American citizen) went to Mexico - or Switzerland, or Costa Rica --  without entering the country through legal channels? I happen to know that answer. The second I got stopped for jaywalking I'd be put in a holding cell -- a jail -- until I could be deported. It wouldn't matter if I'd committed a violent crime. I'd broken the law. Every organized country on Earth has laws like this.  <br/><br/>I wonder what would happen to me -- even as an American citizen -- if I stole someone else's Social Security number and got caught, or just used a fraudulent number? I happen to know that answer too: It's a felony with a maximum sentence of five years in prison and a $250,000 fine.<br/><br/>To compare the right of the United States to have laws regulating its borders and immigration policies to what happened in Nazi Germany is a new low, even for the New York Times.  
There is something so disgusting about having a president stand before such a large group of human beings and use words that make other humans sound less than human.  Living the South during segregation I heard terms denigrating blacks that questioned their humanity as well as their being outside God's concerns.<br/>That we now have a president that says such ugly things is a disgrace to this country.   His questioning the rights and the humanity of others should frighten us.  
Trump and Sherrif Sessions are enacting ethnic cleansing in the name of public safety. They are the real criminals.
Are any of the "criminal aliens" from Eastern Europe being expelled? Or "criminal aliens" from Asia? Or is it just the people from South America, the Caribbean, and Africa?
The biggest criminal are folks who do not pay their fair share of taxes. Thats is the most patriotic thing to do! 
On Friday, I was in DC and able to get tickets to the permanent collection of the US Holocaust Memorial Museum. And although I grew up in Germany and we covered the 3rd Reich in much detail, much of what I learned was new to me. <br/><br/>While spending hours going from exhibit to exhibit, watching video after video, I could not help to feel deja vu at some of the exhibits. I am very well aware that I am walking a very fine line and I do not want to diminish the suffering and death of six million Jews, three million Russian POWs, and the millions of Roma,homosexuals, socialists, communists, union leaders, and other humans stamped as sub-humans by Hitler's Regime. <br/><br/>Having said that, it really frightened me to see that the same arguments and rhetoric used by Hitler and his government, have been resurrected and dominate the arguments against those who are the "other." We should be better than that. We should have outgrown this by now. <br/><br/>What also worries me is another parallel to the 3rd Reich that we are experiencing again. A trip through history shows that much of Europe eagerly participated in the prosecution and killing of the Jews. That hardly any country in the world wanted to take in the refugees, thereby condemning them to die. That most countries for years tried to diminish the suffering and death that was being wrought by Hitler and his government, just so there did not seem a moral obligation to get involved. We are walking this road again. Shame on us!  
As in the past with the United States for those who know its history,  the  questions are still:<br/><br/>1. By their actions who are the real savages here, the American people or the Indigenous First Nation former farmers and Foresters with the descendants of the kidnapped and enslaved African hostages stripped of all culture, lineage, family ties and even recognition as human beings and now simply referred to as "Black"?<br/><br/>2. By their actions and their greed, who reveal themselves as the real "Hunter Gatherers" here, the American people or the Indigenous former  farmers and managers of the Forests of their nations and city-states? <br/><br/>3. By their actions and their lack of empathy and love for their neighbors, who reveals themselves as the real barbarians here, the Indigenous former farmers and foresters, the kidnapped and enslaved  African hostages and their descendants, the LGBT community and the American Islamic community or the majority of the American people?<br/><br/>4. Do those actions explain the reason for the untrammeled rape of the natural world going on at present, the insensitivity and exploitation of fellow American citizens of less means,  the use of untrammeled force as an instrument of citizenship and diplomacy in the traditions of the Mongolian Empire and the desperate ugliness that has descended upon the nation and it's cultural products ?  <br/><br/>5.  Does that lack of cultural substance mean that the American Experiment will disappear? 
Deporting a foreign national to his or her country of origin is not the same as targeting millions of Jews, Roma, Slavs and other "undesirables" for extermination.<br/><br/>If we can't even agree on that then this country really does need to break up. Clearly we're not living in the same reality any longer.
As others have noted, the steady stream of columnists starting with some comparison to Nazi Germany is getting old. If the Democratic Party has any hope of returning to relevancy, they are going to have to impress writers that they do not live in the past...and that our present is not a repeat of the past.<br/><br/>Competent writers could probably compare the misery some of us currently suffer with many times and places in history. But to what end? Will they and their colleague competent writers never give any possible changes so the Trumps and Le Pen's of the world are not re-elected?<br/><br/>Show us your vision of the future, writers and thinkers. Stop comparing the unknowns of today with the knowns of a long time ago. Trust me. We remember.
Mr. Trump may also wish to consider some moral crimes that are indicated in the bible.  You are guilty of the crime of jealousy.  You are guilty of the crime of envy.  You are guilty of the crime of arrogance.  <br/><br/>Hey wait a minute.  This may also apply to Donald Trump.
“MAGA” is turning into our national shame, as the gutless GOP rubber-stamps daily approval of the delusional, inept Trump and his money-grubbing family, as he ramps up billions for private, for-profit prisons, turning America into a police state, much like Germany in the 1930s!!!<br/><br/>Jeff Sessions’s edicts are causing chaos for under-staffed immigration courts, judges and translators as Trump has jams through deportations. In states like Texas, Florida, California, and Arizona, immigrants are being herded like cattle through quick, out-of-control hearings, assuring many erroneous deportations.<br/><br/><a href="https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2017/04/17/immigration-courts-new-rules-trump/98674758/" title="https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2017/04/17/immigration-courts-new-rules-trump/98674758/" target="_blank">https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2017/04/17/immigration-courts-new-ru...</a><br/><br/>America’s becoming another domino in the alt-Right tyranny of its citizens and immigrants…   The world is asking, “Who’s got the guts and decency to introduce Impeachment proceedings? “
     Awful description of what may constitute a 'police state', in these United States, under the new regime of an 'ugly american-in-chief', still in a 'candidate mode' of viciousness, persistent lying, and active promotion of fear, hate and division. This, so to confound, and own, his base of supporters, so that Trump's abuse of power would seem "normal". Even a crook, before the heist, must justify to himself that what he is about to do is not only the right thing to do, but a just retribution of what may have been acquired illegally to begin with. Trump's inane need to find scapegoats to justify his own stupidity may come at a price, when he faces justice 'a la McCarthy': "have you no decency, sir"?    Tolerance of evil may constitute a crime too, a reminder to all those able, and willing, to lend support to this demagogue -charlatan in the White House. Who would have thought, consciences can be bought...if the price is right. Who are we, exactly? Let's wake up folks, before no one is left to speak up, and defend you. One more thing; just because you may have voted for this thug, does not mean you can't change your mind when the evidence becomes overwhelming, his cheating on you, and whose only interest is himself.
Well, yes... much of politics consists of staining all members of a group with the abhorrent behavior of a tiny minority of that group.  Staining all 10 million or so undocumented with the horrible crimes of just one undocumented immigrant is certainly a tactic Trump and his supporters do, and it is awful.<br/><br/>But gosh, let's not reciprocate.  If a disgusting skinhead Nazi likes Trump, don't stain Trump with the actions of that one horrible person.  And let's recall Godwin's law, and try to avoid it.
Keep pushing illegal immigration and Trump will get four more years.
Wow, more Nazi comparisons? Is the NY Times' entire editorial strategy now to just invoke Godwin's Law every day in every way until Trump is no longer president?<br/><br/>People who enter the country and stay here illegally are breaking the law and are subject to whatever legal repercussions are attendant to their legal violations. Trump hasn't made any new laws; he's only trying to enforce laws that have been on the books, but gone ignored or unenforced, for years.<br/><br/>Trump is no Nazi and enforcing the law isn't a Gestapo tactic. And, every time the NY Times endorses a view implying that the US has become some kind of police state, the Times itself looks foolish and loses a little more credibility.<br/><br/>Argue the issues. Emotion and personal anecdote are interesting, but they're not arguments. C'mon, NY Times. You're better than this.
A typical NYT immigration recipe.  Take a liberal university professor (philosophy is always good) and have him write it.  Leading with a comparison to Nazi Germany is always a good lead in followed by homage to Obama.  Use of the term 'undocumented immigrant' over 'illegal alien' is de rigeur, since by implication being undocumented is somehow OK.  Finally imply how the Trump administration is analogous to the Nazis or may become so, and voila!<br/><br/>If an illegal is deported after being stopped for a traffic violation, it may be well be that the reason is not the violation itself but for some prior failing.  And that is different than actively seeking out those for previous traffic offenses as the Nazis did with his grandfather and as he implies is being done today.
A small point - the Jews of Germany were citizens of Germany. The "criminal aliens" targeted by Trump are not citizens. 
By applying this evil rule, both Trump and his father as well as Jared and his father and all their children should be deported as their parents have committed what is considered crimes by the hooligan lawyer along with the racist supremacist  occupying the Justice Department. Welcome to the age of Barbarians.  
Bully, bigot, blowhard, buffoon, grifter, ignoramus, liar, hypocrite, malignant narcissist, petulant egomaniac.  This is what we've got sitting in the Oval Office.  At the risk of channeling Tom Clancy, I would add that Herr Trump is the sum of all fears, a clar and present danger and the enemy of the state.  The Trumpsters constitute the Fifth Column who have stabbed America in the back and in the back.  Götterdämmerung awaits.  
This needs to be seen in context.  Trump and Sessions believe two things: 1.  They can declare anyone they want to be a "on-citizen" without any legal authority, due process or Constitutional legality and 2. Non-citizens have no protections under the law.  This is in effect the Nazi era policy applied to Jews who were first declared to be non-citizens, and then as non-citizens stripped of any protection of German law.  While the backlash against raising the "NZ" word is usually harsh, here it is deserved as the parallel is almost perfect.  Take this together with Trump's calling for his political opponents to be physically assaulted and his belief that political opposition deserves and ought to be suppressed by violence and you have the formula for an America Kristallnacht where Trump will "suggest" to his followers that they burn out, destroy, beat and assault his opponents and the physical premises which embody the opposition.  First to go will be Planned Parenthood Clinics, then liberal political meetings, then the mob will move on to Sunagogues and black churches.
While I am sympathetic to your position against deportation for trivial missteps, your comparison to the holocaust i inappropo. Jews who were rounded up in Europe  were citizens in their home countries.  Mexicans who are sent back to Mexico are in the US illegally.  No further "crime" is necessary to justify their removal.
It seems to me, Trump is the criminal in the room!
The naturalization application asks for any crimes or offenses the applicant has committed. You are asked to swear, under oath, that everything in your application is accurate. The application process is too rigid, but it's not fair to entirely blame the Trump administration. It's bureaucracy that has given itself too much power.
Illegal immigrants should not be here, and in a perfect world, would leave or be made to leave.<br/><br/>But how much are we as a nation willing to spend to make this happen? To locate, arrest, detain, try, and deport millions of people? As one reality-based law enforcement leader put it, there are just so many seats on the bus. Do you want to fill them up with dangerous criminals, or petty lawbreakers?<br/><br/>And in addition to the actual costs of detention and deportation, there are the collateral costs of dealing with the millions of American-born children left unsupported or alone.  Are we willing to fund expanded social services and foster-care programs for these children? And good luck expecting these kids to grow up to be healthy and productive citizens.<br/><br/>There's a reason why, in the slightly saner Bush and Obama years, many lawmakers on both side of the aisle supported forms of amnesty and paths to citizenship. They realized that trying to excise these people from American society was impossible.<br/><br/>Despite heart-wrenching stories like those of Mr. Stone's grandmother, and more recents ones about American immigrants, it's pretty clear that many Americans don't care about the human cost of increased enforcement. <br/><br/>Maybe Democrats need to make the fiscal case for more humane immigration reform.
For the record, although subject to deportation proceedings, "Mere undocumented presence in the United States alone, however, in the absence of a previous removal order and unauthorized reentry, is not a crime under federal law."<br/><a href="https://www.aclu.org/files/assets/FINAL_criminalizing_undocumented_immigrants_issue_brief_PUBLIC_VERSION.pdf" title="https://www.aclu.org/files/assets/FINAL_criminalizing_undocumented_immigrants_issue_brief_PUBLIC_VERSION.pdf" target="_blank">https://www.aclu.org/files/assets/FINAL_criminalizing_undocumented_immig...</a><br/>Also: "Despite the anti-immigrant rhetoric, “criminal alien” is not a legal term and undocumented immigrants are not “criminal aliens” under federal law. The term “criminal alien” is not defined anywhere in the federal Immigration and Nationality Act (INA). To the extent it appears at all in the INA, it is used in the subject heading of several provisions that describe documented and undocumented immigrants who have been convicted of criminal offenses (after a trial or guilty plea) that are designated as “aggravated felonies” or as<br/>“crimes involving moral turpitude.” 
Examining the last sentence we see, ironically; the author uses the same process as the administration she denigrates - scare tactics:<br/><br/>"If we look away when the state brands someone a criminal, who among us then remains safe?"<br/><br/>An important difference is that we expect such things from a politician, as agitation and bogeyman creation are as traditional in politics as too much salt on carnival food. Conversely writers arguing ethical causes are held to a higher standard and may not play on heartstrings while overlooking inconvenient facts. In this case nowhere is it mentioned that a crime is committed generically by illegally crossing the border. True it is a misdemeanor, but so is simple assault. <br/><br/>The standard that exists is experiential: if you or I cross a border illegally into say Canada because we just want to live there, what sort of treatment should we expect, how free should we feel to stay? I'd be nervous knowing I was in the wrong. That's the common sense hurdle Jason Stanley fails to leap.
The article states:<br/><br/>"Between January and March of this year, Immigration and Customs Enforcement arrested 21,362 immigrants, Of those arrested, 5,441 of them had no history of violating a law."<br/><br/>Do keep in mind that every person who enters or overstays a visit to the US without legal authorization is violating US immigration law. So, the sentence should read "had no history of violating a law other than the immigration laws."<br/><br/>For those who are curious, I could well be classified a liberal, I have certainly tended to vote Democrat for decades, and I despise the dehumanization of immigrants that is is a hallmark of this administration.<br/><br/>And, I'd say that all the farm workers and construction workers and domestic workers who aren't in the country legally nonetheless do more good than harm to the US economy.  And most of them are decent, hardworking, and even tax-paying people.<br/><br/>But I recoil at the claims that no laws are broken when immigration law is broken and that anyone who successfully slips in is automatically entitled to stay. That philosophy doesn't work for movie theaters, airplanes and university admissions. The sense of entitlement that is expressed kills much of my sympathy.<br/><br/>By the way, by analogy, "undocumented" is when I leave my drivers license at home and the police ask me where it is. "Illegal" is when I never had a drivers license to begin with.
"(S)omeone whose character leads them to repeatedly commit serious crimes" seems to describe the person who currently occupies the White House.  Accepting bribes - oh, I mean payments - from foreign governments while dealing with those governments as our head of state is a crime. This person shows no remorse or any signal that he understands the criminality of his acts. Thus his criminality is a character trait, and he therefore is a criminal.
I think a large part of this issue goes back to an underlying principle in much of conservative-leaning thinking: that morality and legality should precisely conform/overlap.  It's the same reason why so many conservatives want Roe overturned--because they believe abortion is immoral and therefore should be illegal.  Similarly, many conservatives believe that the illegal variety of immigration implies a lack of morality and that violators of such morality deserve whatever punishment is doled out.  It's a sadly simplistic way of viewing the world, borne of the hubris of believing that morality is always clear and easily determinable.  To be clear, I'm not a fan of moral relativism, but I find it hard not to question any views that put a complex world in such stark and simplistic terms.
As a business owner in a construction trade the need for skilled workers whose "value" to the greater society is deemed less essential than that of a well educated, technically trained, multi lingual immigrant creates a problem with a practical solution. The door for highly valued workers remains wide open and special consideration is justified as essential to high growth, high profit sectors of the economy. And of course we train our children to pursue those same occupations putting ever increasing pressure on industries like ours to seek qualified workers wherever we can find them. Most of our work force are immigrants, none here illegally, some arrived as refugees of the wars in South East Asia, others made there way here illegally and went through the long and often dehumanizing process of obtaining legal status. These people are hard working, skilled, well compensated and valued, not only by their employer but by their communities as well. The current administration, that embraces dictators and known abusers of human rights as guests to our White House, is headed for criminal status if it is not already there. That they  resort to the rhetoric of past criminal governments should come as no surprise, nor should the craven disregard for due process  and equal protection under the law. We could fix immigration tomorrow if the short term political and larger corporate interests that prevent that from happening could be put aside and practical consideration put in its place. 
What a brilliant, articulate, important true story.<br/>What chills it gives to the skeletons in all our closets.
Another example of the monstrous act we as a nation have committed by electing to the most powerful position in the world someone with a complete lack of humility, mercy, and decency, let alone an understanding of how the world actually works or a curiosity to learn.<br/>Trump's supporters -- many (most?) of whom strongly identify as "Christians" -- continue to support him, and thus to cheer on this cruelty and short-sightedness. For them, damage to immigrants and people of color -- the Other -- not to mention to the planet and our civil society, appears to be a feature, not a bug. Until they are hurt by Trump's horrid acts, they will continue to support him.<br/>I should probably just program a macro on my computer with that comment --- [Ctrl] [Alt] [T].
I am a Canadian and was recently coming back from my vacation, I was in Egypt, Jordon and Israel, I am a Muslim and had absolutely no issues in entering or leaving these countries. I was in transit through Chicago and got detained for 2.5 hours. In the waiting area all the people detained were Muslims at least while I was there. One of the detained person was a flight crew member from maybe Etihad. I have lived in North America I am a professional with no criminal record.  After 2.5 hours I was allowed to leave, no explanation was given for my detention and when I asked if this will happen every time I visit US the officer just said maybe. At least I have the opportunity to stay away, I sympathise with the Americans that do not have this choice and I hope that this will end up in court and this policy be stopped. 
The deportation that drives me nuts - deporting an immigrant for the crime of creating an illegal taxpayer ID so that they can PAY taxes. Come on!<br/><br/>BUT I don't have an issue at all with deporting an immigrant after a violent felony.
In NY, there is supposed to be a difference between what may be  a "criminal offense" and what is a violation of the city code, the minor laws which govern smoking in public, littering, smoking on the subways or  spitting in the street.<br/>Violations are not crimes , but it appears that much of the ignorant "lay" or non lawyer public does not know the difference between violations  and criminal offenses.<br/>a $2 fine, paid by mail, for smoking in the subway-, is quite a different matter from being arrested and convicted for robbing a liquor store with a gun or shooting a President.<br/>    What our current President and GOP are trying and succeeding in doing, is to conflate and confuse actions that would be ignored under ordinary circumstances, by our immigration authority.<br/> What has occurred is  Trump and his people are trying to ram through an American version of the infamous "Wannsee Protocols", or the German bureaucratic decisions to put into effect and law,  previous promises concerning the total destruction and ruination of the Jewish people, the Gypsies and all homosexuals and any thought to be gay.<br/>Current US action  to affect immigration-a civil affair- be remembered as the time when America reneged on its legal promises , repudiating its own Constitution. The worst aspect of these acts is that so many ordinary people whose parents or  grandparents  came from other nations, are now saying and doing nothing to  stop it.
I think this country, collectively, has lost its mind.
     I'm lucky.  I live in a northern border state, was born here, have white skin, and an Anglo-Saxon surname.  It seems that anyone who does not hold these qualities is suspect of being an "illegal" by the new Trump-Session national police force; the one they are creating using local police forces, ICE, and the Border Patrol.  They are also busy setting up detention camps where all suspected individuals can be held without recourse to our court system.  I'm lucky.<br/>     I have to wonder how many Germans sat and thought the same thing as the Jews were rounded up in the early thirties.  You should wonder too.
To the Author: Thank you for a beautifully written article.
This is a false comparison.  According the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, "80% of the 500,000 Jews in Prewar Germany were citizens" with the vast remainder Polish citizens with permanent residency.  Donald Trump has not advocated deporting US citizens of Mexican heritage, though he has made some terrible statements (see Judge Curiel) about them.  He has talked about deporting the 11 million people in this country that are in violation of our laws.  We can have a number of reasoned conversations about how to handle that between full amnesty and open borders to full deportation and 100% closed borders.<br/><br/>However, when we make these histrionic comparisons between Trump and the worst policies of the Nazi regime, it actually blunts the power of the solid arguments against Trump as the accuser can be written off by the other side as hysterical.  Trump is a xenophobe, a liar, a philanderer, a serial sexual harasser, a wannabe tyrant, and America's own Silvio Berlusconi.  That should be more than enough to indict his presidency.
By the Trump administration's own legal standards, the President himself should be booted out of America a thousand times over.
This article is full of ridiculous obfuscations. Humans do not have the inherent right to move where they wish on this planet. Americans, like nationals of every single nation on the planet, have the right to determine who gets to come here and who does not. Sending people home when they take it upon themselves to ignore that right is not a human rights violation. 
Thank you, Professor Stanley, for sharing your grandmother's story.  Words have powerful meanings and are freighted with associations that extend those meanings.  Characterizing entire groups as "criminals" does brand that group as nefarious and harming the broader society, which is almost never the case.  If we are not sensitive to how language is used to peel off certain citizens/aliens to isolate and then punish them then we risk falling into exactly what befell Germany.  There is a reason for the saying, "the pen is mightier than the sword" and heaven help us if we allow this administration to vilify people without understanding what is happening.
Supreme Court Chief Justice Roberts' example, driving 60 in a 55 zone, is not even a criminal act.  At worst, it is a civil violation, that subjects the violator to a fine and possibly a notice placed on one's driver's license ("points").<br/><br/>Criminal driving offenses can include DUI, reckless driving, leaving the scene of an accident, and so forth.  A parking ticket or a simple moving violation is not a criminal offense.<br/><br/>The position of the US Government in the Trump Administration appears to be well outside of any reasonable reading of the law, because most traffic offenses are not criminal acts.<br/><br/>Emperor Donnie is a would-be dictator if he could get his way.  This man needs to be removed from office because he clearly does not have the ability to carry out his duties in compliance with the US Constitution.
As a former South Floridian, I find Trump's position regarding the deportation of illegal immigrants to be stunningly hypocritical. The Palm Beach Post claims that the Trump Organization has brought in close to 3,000 foreign workers on temporary visas; The Daily Beast says that number is closer to 1,200.<br/>The Palm Beach Post has written about the difficulty South Florida citizens have had in even being able to apply for jobs at Mar-a-Lago and at other Trump properties; citizens have been told that no jobs were available. These jobs included not only housekeeping and waitstaff jobs, but also middle management positions. Recently workers with temporary visas were brought in to staff Trump's vineyard in Virginia. It has been repeatedly reported that workers stay in the US illegally after their work visas expire.<br/>Not only is Trump not hiring American citizens for these jobs, he is increasing the population of illegal aliens.
Way back when 45 was not 45 the seeds of the rhetoric began and I shuddered then. It has only progressed to worse and worse.<br/>Why are we so blind to what could be in a month more, 2 or 3 or  5 etc? This  country is careening as it remains in the power of  an unprincipled, ignorant "leader."<br/>I pray.
Trump's most recent interviews show perhaps more strongly than ever that the man is not playing with a full deck. We need to find a way to get him to stop playing with our lives now.
a frightening, but important article. everyone who calls him/herself a person of God should think about the meaning of our president's words, and reconcile his words and actions with what your Savior said to do -- do unto others as you would have them do unto you.
An Irish national flew to the US on a tourist visa and then overstayed for a few decades because the employment opportunities were better. A Mexican crosses the border in the Arizona desert (because he is unable to obtain even a tourist visa because of the restrictions we have) and lives here for a few decades because of the employment opportunities. Who is Jeff Sessions going to deport? The Irishman with a handful of DWIs or the Mexican with a spotless record? We make it virtually impossible for anyone but the very well-to-do Mexicans to enter the US legally. The restrictions in place to obtain even a tourist visa are harsh. But anyone who can put together the cost of a plane ticket can show up from a visa-waiver country. Immigration violations have always been administrative not criminal offenses. Trump and the white nationalists are done a splendid job working the nation in to a lather. Our current mess is a combination of ludicrous immigration policy, oblivion to the effects of trade pollicy, racism and a host of others. If only a wall was simple enough to fix it. Someone need to start charter flights from Puebla, Mexico to  Quebec and just have the passengers wander across the virtually unprotected  Northern border.  Maybe then Washington will realize they have to build rational policy not brick and mortar walls.
"Someone who runs to catch a bus is not necessarily a runner; someone who commits a crime is not necessarily a criminal."<br/><br/>“When I use a word,’ Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful tone, ‘it means just what I choose it to mean — neither more nor less.’<br/><br/>Unless we can agree on basic language, a discussion is meaningless.  A runner is one who runs, for sport or to catch a bus. A criminal is one who commits a crime, habitually or as a one-off.<br/><br/>The question being argued in Maslenjak v. United States is if intentional misstatements on naturalization forms are to be considered a basis for revoking the citizenship granted on the basis of the lies. I claim that it is Justice Kennedy who is "demeaning the priceless value of citizenship” by allowing it to be granted without regards to the truth or falsehood of the applicant's statements.<br/><br/>Lastly, there are no illegal immigrants who have no history of violating a law, just as there are no bank robbers who have no history of violating a law. There may well be members of either group who have no SUBSEQUENT history of violating a law, but being a member of the group automatically means that one has violated at least one law. The question one needs to ask is if first offenses should get an automatic pass under the law, or if we live in a society where any violation of law bears the possibility of punishment.
The Administration's lawyer's response to Chief Justice Roberts question is truly disturbing. The law can be interpreted in multiple ways, hence courts to sort that out. But the rigidity displayed in that one response should make every American on the left of right uneasy. That level of rigidity, either from the Right or the Left is unacceptable in a nation that prides itself on the rule of law, as interpreted by the courts, not individuals in an Administration.
My heart aches to think of how long it will take to repair the damage done by Trump's words. And my heart aches at how far and fast my country has fallen from the values I always believed it held. 
A criminal is someone who repeatedly and wantonly violates laws, who has been arrested and prosecuted and found guilty of doing so. Driving over the speed limit might be a criminal act, but doing so does not make someone a criminal. We carefully distinguish in our daily lives from being caught in a violation and those who live their lives by criminal means.<br/><br/>Trump's endless campaign against immigrants is disgusting. He is doing it only to get applause, only to please the most devoted of his followers so that he can keep his presidency afloat for as long as possible. He is doing it for base motives and it is clearly a threat to American values and decency. Yet, Trump would not be able to ride this pony if political leaders of the last generation or two had had the courage to move more forcefully to resolve the issue.<br/><br/>Republicans have secretly favored undocumented immigration to keep wages down and so that many of their clients, including industrial size farmers, could more easily get the labor the need. Democrats have not wanted to address the issue because they knew it would cost them votes and raise the ire of the supporters who believe that allowing some undocumented immigration is a humanitarian concession to reality. Both parties have failed, both parties use the issue for their own purposes.<br/><br/>This era of demonization will eventually backfire on Trump and on the Republicans. A better solution than calling people "snakes" will emerge.
Mr. Stanley is right on point. What he shared with all today is a very cautionary tale, and should be tah not be taken lightly.<br/><br/>Untold numbers related to the paternal side of my family died in death camps in WWII. I strongly recommend everyone to please read this article. <br/><br/>Thank you.
This article confuses or intentionally merges two different things: (1) deportation of non-citizens here illegally and (2) stripping someone of citizenship. I'd like to know more about the case, Maslenjak v. United States, in fact I'll google it now, but I don't find this piece helpful. If the author wants to make the case that Trump plans to strip citizens of citizenship and then deport them, then make that case. You could argue that felonies are too easy to commit (there are so many, you have no idea; almost everyone has committed a felony), that they should be more limited to the most serious crimes, and that stripping an immigrant of citizenship either should not be permitted or should be permitted only of those convicted of that more narrow definition of felonies. But as written this just comes across as a disorganized mishmash.
The U.S. immigration law is intricate and in many places self-contradictory. Even someone with a major corporate employer, professional immigration lawyers and the best of personal intent can find themselves "out of status".  <br/><br/>The concept of criminality is still useful, however, since it can be applied to those who genuinely want to harm others, even if the laws violated are those of logic and sound moral conduct as opposed to written acts emanating from legislative bodies. In fact, a large number of these criminals seem to be sitting in legislative bodies, supported in many cases by people who might well be labeled moral criminals. It's just a question of fitting the right boot on the right foot.
Some people, such as Louisa, do not understand immigration.  The immigrants involved here are not illegal, they are lawful permanent residents applying for naturalization.  They have been here a minimum of five years as residents before they are eligible to apply.  And while the US is not targeting them based on religion, there is certainly an "otherness" component to Trump's anti-immigrant rhetoric.  This is not "nonsense," this is a replay of all our past eras of anti-immigrant sentiment: against the Chinese, against the Irish, against the Japanese, etc.  Until we can get past the view that American means white, or Christian (or Jew), to see that America really is a multi-racial, -ethnic, -religious society, people like Trump will continue to ascend.
The circumstances that Jason Stanley describes are tragic and fraught with tension.  However, one has to wonder about all the nightmare scenarios that the left is raising, turning every situation contrary to their holier-than-thou rhetoric into fascism, or worse, and a potentially horrific Trump policy.  It makes me wonder how under this outside-the-boundaries new presidency,   we can become a wiser body politic, rather than fear-riddled, huddled masses, by applying political values to our own particular national time and history.  I, for one, am tired of the scare-tactics propaganda in the Opinion Pages of the NY Times.
Are the people living in South Dakota in violation of the Sioux Treaty of 1868/Treaty of Fort Laramie also illegal immigrants no matter their record of occupation?  They and their ancestors have illegally, under the terms of the treaty, occupied, bought, sold, and exploited Lakota lands.  Shouldn't the federal government first enforce those laws which arise from its treaty obligations?
The author suggests that a criminal is "someone whose character leads them to repeatedly commit serious crimes." How do we define character in any objective way?
Incredibly good piece.<br/>Wow.<br/>This type of visceral story and explanation of today's policy needs to be heard.<br/>I believe a great majority of Americans would be sympathetic. <br/><br/>I wonder…<br/>Maybe if the Reagan administration in the 80's had not pursued the most inhuman foreign policy in Central America - destabilizing entire civil societies by giving arms and training and material support to the most anti-democracy, authoritarian, violent movements and people - we would not see today those nations in turmoil, who's people often flee for their lives. <br/><br/>They come here in many cases because they are desperate to escape the generations-long aftermath of our then President's misguided, paranoid policies. It was 36 years ago and almost none of us noticed or cared. <br/><br/>The popular movements against corrupt, tin dictators all over Central America were met with violence and unspeakable repression courtesy of American training, arms and funding. <br/><br/>Dumb policy always comes home to roost and boomerang on us.  If you destabilize another nation, people pick up and move. <br/><br/>Can you imagine what this foretells for us given Trump and company…their epic stupidity.
In the US this is all part of the Trump blame game of finger pointing.  First he tells people that America is not great, then he blames it on immigrants and convinces his ignorant base that if we just deport **them** America will suddenly become great again.  Never mind that they mostly take jobs that most Americans adamantly refuse to do and that they are given those jobs because the employers couldn't find anyone to do them.  They aren't typically criminals; they obey the laws at a higher rate than citizens.<br/><br/>Let's finger point and blame immigrants for loss of blue collar jobs, that the immigrants don't take, rather than or own workforce inability to update skills to the automation and computer skills necessary in the rapidly evolving world.
Why should we be surprised?<br/><br/>The Trump administration - aided by the active or silent - support of Republicans in Congress continues their program of hatred.<br/><br/>Shame on them for doing this, and shame on Americans for letting it happen!<br/><br/>This is not who we are.  This is not the shining city on the hill for the world to admire and aspire too.  These are the actions of a small hatefull tyrant.
This is an insightful piece of commentary, shockingly appropriate to our times in the United States.  I have come to believe that Americans who voted for Trump did so because of one reason, and one reason alone: his oft-stated hatred of immigrants.  Perhaps it arises out of self-hatred, perhaps just out of pure sociopathy.  No matter what, we - immigrants and natural-born citizens alike - stand to lose our common American roots because of this single catastrophic event - the election of Donald Trump.
Ah yes, the law!  First we fashion the law-in accordance with the cultural views of the time and the locale.  Then we have the letter of the law - to be interpreted literally or with judgment.  Next comes the actual practice of the law - and we are back to cultural views, judgment and literal interpretations.  Literal interpretations often lead to absurd conclusions.  It must have been embarrassing for the DOJ lawyer to have to argue this case before the court,
So is Melania up for deportation under their view of legality or what?<br/><br/>Didn't she work without proper documentation and lie about it during naturalization? Wouldn't this render her deportable according to the administration?
trump's immigrant criminality nicely gravitates to the broadest interpretation as to who will then be labeled undesirable. In 30's Germany undesirable elites eventually encompassed virtually all intellects. It seems to me that this is where this government is pointing. No one will be safe from the man who stood up to college graduates. 
I was absolutely shocked to read the argument from the Justice Dept.'s lawyer that people should be stripped of citizenship for failing to report the most minor incidents (even if they weren't caught). As Justice Roberts suggested, a person could be stripped of citizen ship if they failed to report that they drove 5 mph over the speed limit even though they didn't get a ticket. Should prospective citizens have to report unkind thoughts too?<br/><br/>Under their proposed law, if the 'inJustice Dept' were not lead by Sessions, they might have a closer look at Melania Trump's application for citizenship. If they found that she didn't report a jay walking incident from years ago (although she wasn't caught) they'd have to strip her of her citizenship and deport her? <br/><br/>I cannot believe that we are wasting US dollars and Supreme Court time on such absurdity! Every day has become a Trump limbo dance - how low can you go?
Trump's creeping fascism terrifies me. Demonizing and alienating people is only part of his strategy, but it might be the most cruel part.<br/><br/>To resist Trump, we must resist setting people apart and pushing them away and celebrate what is greatest about the USA: diversity, including immigration.
Those who criticize the author for equating Holocaust victims and undocumented people here are missing the point. The point is that in both instances, the government drew an exceedingly broad and arbitrary definition of what constitutes a "criminal." When we hear the term "criminal," we think of someone who has willfully done something in violation of the law, that an upstanding member of society would not -- think violent crimes, theft, some drug offenses. It's easy to garner support for deporting immigrants who have done that. But what about minor offenses, offenses that most adults have committed at one time or another? Should people who do this be labeled as "criminals," subject to having their lives upended?<br/><br/>Some argue that entering without permission, or overstaying a visa, is a crime in and of itself. But that ignores the complexity of how we came to have 11 million undocumented immigrants here in the first place; it is a product of a ridiculously understaffed bureaucracy for processing immigration applicants AND an economy that functions on cheap immigrant labor. You can't view the issue of illegal immigration without acknowledging these two realities, and to now, after all these years of benefitting from cheap immigrant labor, place people who have built their lives here in constant fear of having their families ripped apart, is arbitrary and cruel. It's not Nazi Germany, but the arbitrariness of what constitutes a "criminal" is the issue.
Actually, Tutsi were most frequently described as "cockroaches," not snakes.
The fact that the Trump administration would attempt to make this argument, that a person's citizenship could be revoked because of some past, undisclosed or recorded transgression, should be a red flag so large it blots out the sun.<br/><br/>Add to this, Trump's invitation to the Philippine's murderous dictator and his suggestion the Constitution is archaic, should cause us all to take a stance of constant hyper-vigilance and action.  Multiply it by his congratulatory chat with Turkey's new supreme leader and we have some problems, y'all.  <br/><br/>Trump is now the most dangerous human being on the planet. bar none. His disregard for the truth and for the Constitution has made him in violation of his oath of office, since the moment he uttered the words.  And then there's the Emolument's Clause.  <br/><br/>It is the obligation of the non-executive branches of government to prevent this man from moving an inch in any direction, until we can legally remove him and his henchmen from office.  <br/><br/>The dismantling of American Democracy would deliver Trump's boss, Vladimir Putin, what the Cold War could not.  <br/><br/>Interesting how masses of ill informed people can be more effective than any expensive arms race.<br/><br/>We need to expedite the investigation into collusion before Trump incites a war with North Korea and our power grid goes down for a year.<br/><br/>That's your Riechstag moment, y'all. Steve Bannon knows this.  I'd bet it's the topic of their late night chats, he and Don.<br/><br/>Now's a good time to build a garden.
"5,441 of 21,362" arrested illegal immigrants had "no history of violating the law". And that is presented as criticism of ICE's actions? Really?<br/><br/>That means that of the illegal immigrants arrested in that period, 75% (3 out of 4) had a criminal history, beyond the crime of illegal entry into the US.<br/><br/>That is an amazing confirmation that the vast majority of illegal immigrants being arrested have a criminal history, as defined by the author. Bravo. Lets get them out of our streets and our country.<br/><br/>Liberals will never win this argument. Trying to defend illegal immigrants with additional crimes will alienate all thinking, law and order Americans.
If we were to apply the awful plan that the Swiss extremists wanted to pass, than President Trump could be swept up based on his record, and sent back to Scotland, or to Germany (or to Sweden, for that matter, since he lied in print about his father's heritage).
Well its refreshing to see that apparently the Judicial branch is still not yet infected by the racial sickness that seems to be spreading - again, in the US. <br/><br/>So far its the Judicial Branch doing the hard work of resisting the racial fear mongering the Trump Admin is promoting...as well as their inept means to try and enforce it. <br/><br/>Not so much backbone being shown by the GOP, and the Dems...well, they're still being wimps. <br/><br/>Who knew I'd be this happy about Chief Justice Roberts POV on a case. <br/><br/>The depth of vigilance being forced upon the citizenry by this Admin is astounding, and scares me a little. Its like we're being assaulted by swarms of hornets coming in every window at the same time. While the ants are over-running the cupboards too...the way the WH and its lap-dog Justice Dept is currently behaving...<br/><br/>Our vigilance is being severely tested. 
Regardless of whether it's a proper position to be taken by the government it is troubling that  the author did not explain the Obama administration inherited and prosecuted the case  throughout his  eight year presidency. Trump has hardly touched it. He is the author of a book about propaganda.
The article is incorrect on one point at least.  Read Trump's Executive Order of Jan 25 and you will see that not even a trivial criminal violation is needed for one to be a priority for deportation.  All that is needed is that an immigration official thinks that the person 'pose() a risk to public safety.'
It is disturbing to me that when interiewed, Trump makes statements that say he isn't planning to have all undocumented workers or illegal aliens deported, only those with criminal histories - 'bad dudes', 'bad hombres' BUT we regularly see news stories that report people are being picked up and deported when they show up for a regular check-in with immigration services. In many instances they are deported to "their country" when it has been many years since they lived there or in some instances do not even speak Spanish. The administration appointees all seem to be in lockstep with regard to deportation and seem to have the attitude that "the President's powers will not be questioned".  All his powers need to be questioned!
There is a way to address the illegal immigration issue with laws already on the books. . . .  Enforce the laws which prohibit hiring anyone who cannot document their right to be here.  That will choke off the flow across the border.  We saw this when our country was in recession.  As jobs dried up so did border crossings.<br/><br/>There are of course consequences, as the source of low wage employees dries up, your strawberries will now cost $25 per box, there will be a housing and construction shortage, dinner at your favorite restaurant will start at $100, and you will have to mow your own lawn. . . <br/><br/>I predict that when the consequences of Trump's border enforcement program starts impacting his buddies in the country club set, the enforcement actions will become a much lower priority.  Our lifestyle depends on this wink and nod arrangement with Mexico. 
"someone who commits a crime is not necessarily a criminal"<br/>This from a professor, at Yale no less. And we wonder what's wrong with the higher education institutes in the US. There's stupidity and then there's self destruction. Why exactly are animals any less than human beings? For that matter plants are life too - What do you get to eat as food then? You can stretch philosophy to self-immolation but vast majority of Americans do not want to do that and for very good reasons. So lay off with the non-sense. This is exactly the reason why we have a narcissistic, inexperienced leader as President. 
Utilizing the author's cogent expression for criminality; "a resonant meaning — people who by their nature are insensitive to society’s norms", leads to the obvious conclusion that, President Trump is a criminal.
Trump... compared... immigrants to poisonous snakes, to great applause...<br/>It is difficult to admit that my neighbors with Trump signs are that vile.  I suppose that's a central point of this piece.
My grandfather was arrested the morning after Kristallnacht, for what crime he never knew.  He was a well respected woolen's manufacturer in his town, had served in the German army in WWI earning an iron cross for bravery.  He was lucky in that he was released from a concentration camp after 3 weeks, and escaped with his family to the USA at the expense of his former life, home property and a tattooed number on his forearm.  <br/><br/>When I look at my governments reaction to immigrants, illegal or otherwise my stomach turns.  We cannot let horrors like this be repeated again in our own time.
This is a compelling comparison of Serbia to Nazi Germany. Not so much for the US and Nazis. <br/><br/>Jews, Catholics, gypsies, and others in Nazi Germany were not refugees. They didn't willfully ignore German law and sneak in. They were born there. Muslims, ethnic Albanians, and others in the Balkans were similar - born there.<br/><br/>The case before the Supreme Court involves a woman who claimed to be a refugee. She said she faced persecution in Bosnia. She said husband had not served in the military. In fact, her husband served in a unit that was linked to war crimes. She faced no persecution. Her husband was a likely war criminal. That's two very material lies.<br/><br/>The US extradites war criminals - Nazis and Serbs. In recent years we have done so for both wars. We have an established president of not giving criminals citizenship. Not to mention Mr. Obama had some American citizens executed without due process. <br/><br/>This is not the same thing as lying about speeding. In fact, the infractions inferred here being used to deport illegals aren't crimes at all. Speeding, shoplifting, even DUI are misdemeanors - IOW, not criminal. Justice Roberts knows that.<br/><br/>The VOICE program was inspired by real cases of illegal aliens - hundreds of them - killing Americans. During the campaign Mr. Trump met the Remembrance Project (<a href="http://theremembranceproject.org)" title="http://theremembranceproject.org)" target="_blank">http://theremembranceproject.org)</a>. Hearing their stories, he was moved to act.<br/><br/>This isn't the same thing. It's a classic fallacy of false equivalence.
They are not immigrants, an immigrant is a person that comes into a country legally, they apply to the countries government they wish to immigrate to and then when the government approves the person for entry they are immigrants. When you break into a country by illegally crossing the countries border without permission then you are an illegal alien or illegal immigrant. You should be charged with a felony and an deported 
My grandfather was jailed by the Gestapo in the mid-30s fro the crime of exporting gold as he hustled my father and family out of Germany.<br/><br/>But in most of America the term "crime" has a specific meaning and it does NOT include parking tickets or speeding tickets. In my state there are three classes of "offenses," - felonies, misdemeanors, and infractions. The latter refers to things that are truly minor, cannot result in any jail and accordingly you get no free lawyer or jury trial.<br/><br/>As a local prosecutor there is no doubt the Trump administration is crossing a line other administrations did not. They are detaining people who are not citizens after ARREST on certain crimes, not waiting for conviction, as has been the custom for decades.<br/><br/>That said, what is a "minor crime?" The drist drunk driving? The second? The burglary of a business, the burglary of a home, domestic violence, or does it have to be repeat domestic violence? I don't know the answer but I do know we could not convince ICE to deport a convicted child molester about 5 years ago. <br/><br/>I grew up in Southern California where the dreaded "migra" and their green vans were a source of great dread. That was not much better than the fear many immigrants feel today, but what should be the dividing line? <br/><br/>Using the Holocaust and the difference between multiple homicides and speeding tickets does not help the conversation of those who do not want to see deporatation raids.
Who among us has not committed a crime? Never engaged in petty shoplifting as a kid? Never sped through a residential street? Never failed to signal a lane change? (Never experimented at least once with MJ? Shhh!)<br/><br/>I'm a 10th generation American citizen of Finnish origins and look it, (Nordic), so there's no chance that I'll be deported for any of those crimes. But if were a 2nd or 3rd generation Hispanic whose parents or grandparents crept across the border in search of a better life, I'd be going underground as much as possible. <br/><br/>If mugged by thugs on the street, I wouldn't call the police. If my sister were raped by an athlete at university, I'd urge her not to report it. If my father found a discrepancy in the sales tax collections reporting for his hardware store, I'd plead with him to just let it go and hope for the best. I'd avoid checking the "ethnic" box at doctor's offices, where it might be important. And I certainly wouldn't celebrate Cinco de Mayo with even the tiniest Mexican flag in the vase on my nightstand! <br/><br/>But my Finnish ancestors fled to America from one of those interminable Russian invasions, so I have nothing to worry about. Nothing at all.        
Jason Stanley has written an excellent well-reasoned criticism of the Trump administration's policy regarding "criminal" aliens. Thank you.
As a reminder, the Supreme court case mentioned dealt with a woman married to a man who served in a Serbian military unit accused of human rights abuses, who lied  about it. This case was started in the Obama Admin. This was not a parking ticket "crime".<br/><br/>Since I live in a highly taxed state, I've born the consequences of illegal immigration. Our school taxes have risen drastically, medical costs drastically, policing cost have risen, due to the illegal immigrant population. ( Crimes are being committed by illegals against other illegals since so many are paid in cash) Our sanitary rules have be flouted by unscrupulous  landlords letting homes be occupied by 20 - 30 illegals were 4 are allowed, increasing the burdens on our sanitation systems and overflowing septic systems.<br/>I'm now dealing with the likely possibility of having to sell my home, the home where I've lived for 50 years, lovingly repaired it, (mowed the lawn myself), and have been connected to my community all these years. My community is no longer affordable for the middle class; firemen, police, etc. can't afford to live in the community they serve.<br/>It's too late for me, but Trump has it right. <br/><br/>PS: I couldn't vote for Trump, (voted for Johnson), solely based on immigration because of his buffonery, but I agreed with him on immigration.
Yep the usual. Citizenship, let's research back to the Constitution. Guns; let's make up some new rules.
What I do know that the Trump Administration may be interested in, is that when you lie during your vetting for a Top Secret Clearance as his Son in-law, Jarod Kushner, about his meeting with at least two Russian government officials during the vetting process, you not only have your Top Secret Clearance revoke, many time you will be terminated from the position;  at least that was the way it was when I worked in the DOD for the Federal Government. 
The only bright spot in this is that the Supreme Court is getting quite familiar with the facist tendencies of this administration during its first 100 days.<br/><br/>Since Congress refuses to do their job, it will be up to the judiciary to defend the Constitution.  So far they seem up to the task.
still, anyone who assaults or threatens the innocent, abuses animals and children, commits identity theft, or engages in knowing fraud deserves none of my sympathy.  I may have to live among them, have them rule over me in government, or be the boss but they get no respect and as little help as i can give.
Prof. Stanley asks a very poignant question in this excellent, thought-provoking opinion piece: "How, then, have so many of us accepted these policies so at odds with our American values?"  I believe that the answer rests, in part, by a strong 'me vs them' or 'us vs them' attitude.  The mass deportation of undocumented people (and their American-born children) 'doesn't affect me!'  And, besides, 'they're here illegally', and 'they broke the law by coming here illegally.'  'It's not MY problem.'  Just as the Nazis portrayed Jews as inhuman, as rats, so, too, has Trump portrayed undocumented people as "rapists and murderers".  This is further exacerbated by Republicans who often display a lack of empathy.
Maybe he's winnowing the " criminals " so there's less competition.
Banishment to exile was the punishment for the 1%; Hoi Polloi were not exiled
The question comes down to whether Trump will succeed at becoming a demagogic leader of a fascist regime. He is using all the tools that have previously worked in this and other countries. 
An immigrant who omits breaking a law? Deport!<br/>A corporation that omits breaking a law? Tax Cuts!<br/>A man who omits truth over falsehoods? President!
Any degree to which I have become inured to the fundamental venomousness of this administration by virtue that it exists in Washington, you helped clear that poisonous miasma away.  <br/><br/>Thank you.
Stanley: "It was the spring of 1936. My grandmother, Ilse Stanley, had just returned from a theater tour ..."<br/><br/>AFAICT, the author's grandmother had no legal training, so she is not a reliable source for German law in 1936.<br/><br/>Stanley: "... Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr., ..."<br/><br/>Stanley fails to note that Roberts quotes Black's Law Dictionary or that there are two related terms, "crime" and "offense":<br/><br/>"CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In Black's Law Dictionary, I looked up what's an offense?  And this is what it says:  It says it's a violation of the law, a crime, often a minor one."<br/><a href="https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_transcripts/2016/16-309_b97c.pdf" title="https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_transcripts/2016/16-309_b97c.pdf" target="_blank">https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_transcripts/2016/16...</a><br/><br/>Further, Stanley never mentions the US Constitution or the US Code, so Stanley doesn't seem to be a reliable source for law in general.<br/><br/>Stanley's essay would have been more persuasive if he had discussed AMERICAN law, instead of giving irrelevant examples from Nazi Germany and contemporary Switzerland.
You all should check the immigration law. Title 8 provides for the deportation of people that haven't committed crimes. Title 8 has been the law for decades.
Prominent science fiction writer Larry Niven created a world in which eternal life was obtained by organ transplant from criminals, including those who committed traffic offenses.  It was probably the most outlandish and hoffifying thing he could think of at the time.
I am a naturalized American citizen.  A few years after the paperwork was completed and I acquired my passport, I discovered that I had made an error in the documents I swore were correct.  <br/><br/>My father died.  He was a naturalized Canadian citizen of middle European ancestry.  When we found his documents they showed that he had been born in his mother's country of origin rather than his father's, as he had always stated.  He was proud of his father's heritage, ashamed of his mother's, and had consequently nudged his own birth in the paternal direction.<br/><br/>Donald won't bother with me.  But it's creepy to know that the same kind of small 'lie' could cost another person their citizenship.
I don't remember who defined, but it might have been Plato, that there are laws that are based on our common group perception of "right and wrong" and laws that exist for the smooth running of society and under most circumstances are not "criminal".<br/>The obvious example of Chief Justice John Roberts, who, like all of us, has exceeded the Double-Nickel (55mph) frequently.  Most traffic laws are just that: Conveniences to oil the wheels of society.<br/>But even when harm is inflicted and there is a victim, either of physical, or financial harm, it is not necessarily "criminal" in the sense of evil.  That's why there's a clear difference between criminal and civil law.  Losing a lawsuit doesn't make you a criminal.<br/><br/>Speeding IS a great example because multiple studies have shown that no matter the actual speed limit, the SAFE speed to drive is basically the same speed 85% of the other drivers are going at.  The ones who are outside that group on either end are the dangerous ones, and, surprisingly, the ones going too slow are the MOST dangerous!   But nobody wants to arrest an old person doing 45 in a 65 zone, yet wants the "maniac" doing 85 locked up.<br/><br/>I'm happy to see that both Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Kennedy fully recognize the totally ridiculous and don't look to be at all willing to bend to the Trumpists' pretzel "logic".  I guess Trump will want them impeached when they "cross" him!
After years of organizing community-driven Restorative Justice programs for the State of Vermont, and delving deep into their working principles, I decided that the use of the word "criminal" as a noun is an example of pejorative labelling. And so I announced to my justice reform contacts worldwide that in the literature of our movement, using "criminal" as a noun would be regarded as both unethical, and as a violation of English grammar. I can think of no legitimate reason to refer to another human being as "a criminal". When considering crimes and other transgressions, and if you are seeking true justice, there are only human beings and other creatures and objects to be considered, and justice can be considered restorative ('healing') only if it seeks to address harm or damages with a view toward 'making things right' to the extent possible.<br/><br/>Plainly Mr. Trump never embraces such considerations, and thus I consider him benighted; someone who hasn't fully progressed to his full potential as a human being. Why are there no stories of a gallant or charitable D.J. Trump? Because the accounts of him are rife with greed and corruption.
I'm not sure what has happened to those 21,362 people who have been arrested, particularly if they have no criminal record.  Are they released with a court date in hand or do they remain in jail until they get their day in court?  
Dear Professor Stanley,<br/><br/>When the fanatical fringe elements of a culture mutate and slowly coalesce to become the mainstream of that culture, such that the brainwashed of both left and right become the front and center, not only does the nation fragment and get torn to pieces, so does every last word in the language of that nation.<br/><br/>No more common ground, no more common decency, no more common courtesy. Only ever more common criminals running things, torching things, and breaking things.<br/><br/>Kleptocracy, plutocracy, idiocracy - anything but a meritocracy, whether in moral, economic, or intellectual standing. So forget trying to "define" who or what is a criminal in today's America. The real question is - Who ISN'T One?<br/><br/>Cordially,<br/>S.A. Traina
The clear problem with the immigration issue is that, yes, undocumented immigrants are actually breaking the law. Yes they are all actually here illegally. Regardless of any other consideration Trump and his supporters are correct.<br/><br/>However, there are many layers to this issue that make the illegal status not so cut and dry. That is the crux of the matter. Humanity, children who are citizens, Dreamers, people with many years of acting just as honestly and as law abiding as any natural citizen are all factors that cause complexities to the matter. <br/><br/>But at it's most basic, the anti-immigrant forces are correct. Undocumented immigrants is just words. They are in fact illegal immigrants and are breaking the law.
Can we have an intelligent debate about immigration policy without using silly euphemisms? The author talks about immigrants  "without status" and "undocumented immigrants" The do have status - they are not here legally. That doesn't mean that we have to deport them, but its not a "status" problem.The vast majority of the immigrants who are here illegally have some form of government identification, have children in out schools and yes, a small  percentage are in jails. They are in fact very well documented.
It is a mistake to ascribe subtlety of thought to the current administration's policy on immigration (or much else for that matter).  They are reactionary and intended to pander to the base fears of their most venal base.  This cogent and cautionary case against categorical labeling presumes that the administration is open to reason, is interested in "justic".  However, there is very little evidence that their motivations are anything other than the political equivalent of "sweeps week" sensationalism, designed to garner attention under the pretense of taking action.  Unfortunately, reason, morality and the tradition of social compassion are no longer in fashion and are being relegated to re-runs.
Failure to disclose illegally working on a tourist visa is not a "trivial misstatement" in one's naturalization proceedings that Justice Roberts refers to.  That would be a material issue if there ever was one.<br/><br/>That is what the evidence/timeline suggests Melania Trump did when she worked as a model without a work visa -- something the Trump campaign/Administration promised long ago to clear up with additional documentation, but has not.
As Chief Justice Roberts pointed out, the United States is a country where laws are strict, but enforcement is not.  Thus, the government can freely choose who they will prosecute and whose crimes and infractions will be ignored.<br/><br/>The crux of the current immigration "problem" is precisely that the US ignored illegal border crossing for a long time.  The undocumented provided a large pool of low wage workers so that American better offs could have cheap domestic servants, less expensive house repairs, and low priced restaurant meals.<br/><br/>After the great kleptocracy, known as The Great Recession, undocumented workers came to be seen as unwelcome competition for the only jobs available.  Now the Trumpites demand that they must be rounded up and removed.
Many people have commented that being in the U.S. illegally is a crime. Granted, but the Justice Department is arguing that “the government may revoke the citizenship of Americans who made even trivial misstatements in their naturalization proceedings.” That means anyone here legally on a green card is subject to DOJ's interpretation of the law and possible deportation.<br/><br/>That's not just dangerous, it borders on tyranny. 
Someone needs to verify if Attorney General Jeff Sessions or if President Trump has ever paid a traffic fine or some other minor violation...they could be criminals. NO WAIT...in my opinion, they are criminals. They do not use the constitution of the United States to protect citizens and legal residents from abuse. They do not guarantee the rights of citizens and legal residents.<br/><br/>Professor Stanley is correct in his article that the current administration is outside the law, but the consequences are and will be dangerous for many years to come. God help us. 
Who is a criminal?<br/><br/>Trump, most of the GOP and 63,000,000 morally bankrupt voters.<br/><br/>What they've done and are continuing to do to this country is the crime of the century.<br/><br/>When you can get people to believe things that they know are untrue, and to say those lies out loud as truth, the game is already over.<br/><br/>We live in the age of the "true believer" - and it spells the end of this country.
"Deliberately obscuring the crucial distinction between someone who violates a law and someone whose character leads them to repeatedly commit serious crimes is an effective strategy for masking gross injustice."<br/><br/>Forget immigrants because this claim pertains to criminal justice laws and procedures in general. What goes unspoken is that the "crucial distinction" is often not made in practice until the criminal has left a trail of victims, their lives changed forever by rape, robbery, assault, battery, or ended by murder. Too late for them. <br/><br/>Public safety should not be equated with the road to genocide. That would be a sort of feel-good "progressive" Trumpism, in fact found often enough in media, Hollywood, and the academy
What is really criminal is living with an election system that is rigged for the benefit of only a few. 
Where would you rather live, in a nation of speeders or in  1930's Germany? Trump fans have committed an ACTUAL crime, voting for a traitor, if not in the strictest "russian mole" sense, certainly in an "enemy of democracy" sense.  The Courts are proving that the entire platform that Trump ran on is unconstitutional--I think that makes his supporters criminals, no?
Indeed, imposing exile or imprisonment on someone represents signficant loss of freedom, and should be done only when "deserved".  So I will throw Stanley's question back at him, and others: what does someone have to do to deserve such punishment?<br/><br/>For those with profusely bleeding hearts, can any individual be held responsible for their actions?  For more moderate thinkers, what is the threshold that defines crime, at least crime worthy of punishment?
Here is a better idea use this to find the "misstatements" Trumps father made as he was becoming a citizen then revoke Trumps citizenship because his father never should have been one. Ditto Sessions, McConnell, Ryan etc.....<br/>They'll finally learn by facing the consequences of their own actions and we'll be rid of some pretty ugly people. 
What this article fails to mention, but which is crucial to understanding where we are in history, is the fact that for hundreds of years in the US, immigration law has been considered civil, administrative law. <br/><br/>If someone had paperwork problems, they either filed more paperwork, or received a Notice to Appear before and immigration judge. <br/><br/>Only since the uninvestigated crimes of 9/11, have immigrants been criminalized, detained in corrupt detention centers which fund GOP campaign contributors. <br/><br/>Overstaying a visa, prior to 9/11 was about as serious as a parking ticket, could be corrected by filing additional paperwork. <br/><br/>But today, all manner of persons with all manner of paperwork issues in their immigration file are detained at a cost of billions of dollars to taxpayers. <br/><br/>The macroeconomic implications of anti-immigrant policies as well are likely to throw the economy into an economic depression. <br/><br/>Already, out west, there are not enough workers to pick the crops and crops are being plowed under. <br/><br/>The GOP led Congress with its cozy relationship with Russia, white nationalists from Russia and neo-Nutzees, is a disgrace to the US and its history. 
Thank you for making this important point.  Unfortunately, the actual criminals, regardless of the legal definition, are now part of the White House administration.
The administration has already targeted for deportation those young people who were brought here while children.  Absent a current violation, by even the most generous interpretation of the law, they cannot be considered criminals.  Nearly all are highly assimilated after having been educated in our schools.  Like many others, they live in "mixed" families, i.e., those with   both legal  and illegal members.  Thus the only way for the administration to carry out its deportation agenda is to sunder  families. Perhaps it is time to reconsider our laws.  We've had bad laws before, such as the Volstead Act or the 1850 Fugitive Slave Act, which resulted in the Dred Scott decision and was only voided by the Civil War Amendments.  The 1850 law led to widespread civil disobedience in the North by those who refused to assist slave catchers.  Today it is clear that the administration,already having initiated a campaign of fear and intimidation, is preparing for a massive removal of people which is likely to foment a modern version of the 1850 resistance.  The alternatives are not simply to deport or risk anarchy as the administration believes.  A more prudent and sensible way would be for a national debate that would focus on changing the law consistent with our public affirmations found in the Declaration of Independence and in the Gettysburg Address.  A national debate on whether immigrants are endowed with certain unalienable rights would be refreshing and instructive.
All illegal "immigrants" are deportable -- before they have committed any crime whatsoever. The penalty for illegal entry is deportation. Let's get that clear. The entire premise of this piece is wrong, as aptly pointed out by Louisa, below.
I know President Trump is not a lawyer (nor am I), so I will help him out. A simple traffic infraction is not a crime. It is a civil matter, unless it exceeds to reckless driving. I know the President is not a detail man.
Donny Crook thinks that the Senate Rules, etc are arcane because they do not let him act like a CEO of us like a privately held company where nepotism is rampant, everything for the benefit of the CEO and whatever the CEO is the only and final word.  I agree with him re the Arcane part.  The ELECTORAL COLLEGE process is arcane and needs to be replaced by dirct vote of ALL citizens.  And everyone is a citizen of the United States, not at the mercy of the state he/she lives in.  That wuld have prevented from this Donney Crook becoming a president and think about having right to determine who becomes citizen or non-citizen.  Donney Crook should be sent to an elementary, may be intermediate school to understand the principles of Democracy, read John Locke and Plato and Aristotle and then allow to vote.
'The word “criminal” has a literal meaning, of course, but it also has a resonant meaning — people who by their nature are insensitive to society’s norms, drawn to violate the law by self-interest or malice.'<br/><br/>Why this could describe the current president.
The fact that he was elected president is proof enough that we are not safe.
A very important aspect of what is happening is the use of name calling.  Referring to a group as "snakes", "apes", "rapists", etc. has the purpose of dehumanizing the persons in that group.  Likewise, putting derogatory names on an individual such as referring to Mr. Obama as "this Stalin" and worse on Fox News also serves the purpose of dehumanizing.  <br/><br/>So what is the point of that?  I got roped into a laboratory study by a colleague interested in aggression.  One of his models was a resident male mouse intruder model:  the resident mouse would attack another male placed in its cage.  And another model he used was to place a mouse in a cage with a rat:  the rat would do what comes naturally and kill and eat the mouse.  This caused me to read the literature on "aggression" and the serotonin nerves that were my interest.  At first the literature made no sense.  Then I realized that I was looking at intraspecies aggression versus predation.  The serotonin system has opposite effects--it checks aggression against peers and promotes predatory behavior.  Thus, by dehumanizing someone, the checks on aggression in your brain shifts from intraspecies to predatory.  When that happens, anything is possible.  <br/><br/>I have watched prosecutors dehumanize a defendant in order to gain a death sentence.  The Nazis dehumanized Jews, Roma and other peoples.  Sunnis call Shia apostates.  The process is repeated again and again in order to unleash the primitive predatory instincts in our brains.
In Trop v. Dulles a plurality of the US Supreme Court said that denaturalization is a cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the 8th Amendment.  When someone was brought here as a child and knows no other country, it is no different.
Though the ostensible reasoning for using the term "Criminal alien" may be to suggest that they are only punishing criminals, in actuality Trump has just replaced "illegal alien" with "criminal alien".  Say it often enough and loud enough and the words become linked, synonyms. It conflates an act with the person and declares them 'bad'.<br/>The irony is that we are getting this from Trump who is, all thing considered, a bad person - lies, cheats, reneges on debts - but has no criminal record because he the money to slink away untouched.  So, who's the snake?<br/>Maybe all his venom and bombast is about self-loathing.  Where's a good pop psychologist when you need one?
Our newly emboldened DOJ is led by Jeff sessions from the Confederate state of Alabama. His predilections are well known. He wants to nullify state laws legalizing marijuana; he will not enforce voter's rights protections; he wants to amp up the war on drugs, in spite of what it has cost us since its inception-- in money, morality, and human life. Democrats need to get out the vote in 2018 and beyond or there will be no limits on what confederates like sessions will enact and enforce.
Of course exiling someone for something as trivial as a parking violation is grotesque but trump's base is exactly that...grotesque.<br/><br/>They are the exact same people they were in junior high, if they even made it that far.<br/>They are the very definition of Arrested Development.<br/><br/>They are angry, nasty smelly little children.
These undocumented people pick your fruits and vegetables.  Get ready for higher prices on these items.  
So, should Mike Flynn lose his citizenship? And what about Trump himself, who has acknowledged violence toward women?
Conservatives have enjoyed both sides of the illegal immigrant issue for decades. Why are there so many millions of Mexicans in this country illegally? Because it has greatly benefited agribusinesses and construction companies and hundreds of other employers who have paid these workers substandard wages while having the ultimate power to threaten them with arrest and deportation if they displease their bosses in any way. No reasonable path for workers to cross our southern border has stood a chance of being adopted while it has been to the economic advantage of business owners not to have one. Your gardener and the restaurant's dishwasher are here illegally because there is an economic benefit to having them here just the way they are. At the same time it suits their employers to vote for Trump because he's business friendly. Conservatives have never had a problem with hypocrisy.
Congress made illegal entry and working in the United States without authorization felony offenses because illegal immigration undermines the nation’s ability to control its border and regulate immigration. There are huge differences between legal and illegal immigration. Legal immigration produces a highly diverse stream of immigrants who come speaking a multitude of languages from a multitude of countries and cultures.  Their tremendous diversity encourages them to assimilate and acculturate into American society rather than coalescing in racial and ethnic enclaves. They also tend to possess the skills and education required to flourish in U.S. society. Illegal immigration produces a non-diverse, low-skilled and poorly educated stream of migrants who lack the skills and education required to assimilate, acculturate and flourish in U.S. society.  
When people want to justify something in their own minds and in public perception, they haul out every argument they can think of to justify it. Some of those arguments are valid and others are not only not valid, they are spurious.<br/>We have a situation with 11 million undocumented people living in the US. They are by definition doing something that is against the law. We ought to be asking whether the law should be changed in some way or whether all of them should be deported.<br/>For a lot of them their roots go deep. They've been here most of their lives. They have family members who are US citizens and who have no desire to disrupt their lives and go to another country. Many make contributions that can be quantified. Other contributions, adding to cultural diversity is an example, that are less easy to assess. Some even think that kind of contribution is a negative.<br/>Some are "bad hombres." They commit serious crimes. Deporting them to countries who are unable to handle the burden is itself problematic and has contributed to the growth of gangs like the MS 13 now in the headlines.<br/>For a long time now, we've created problems for ourselves enforcing drug laws that have unfortunate consequences. Immigration enforcement will be similar if we don't use our intelligence to do what's smart and humane.
I am a Democrat and a liberal. So I am angered by liberal story lines that promise to do nothing except cost us more elections.<br/><br/>There is no comparison between Jewish victims of the Holocaust and people here voluntarily and illegally from other countries. <br/><br/>I don't care how many Yale professors tell me they're comparable. all that tells me is that some people are employed beyond their capabilities.<br/><br/>The drumbeat of this and other nonsense is what allowed a carnival huckster like Trump claiming he'd give straight talk to win.
Undoubtedly Trump would also seek to deport Clinton voters, arguing they also committed a crime.
Jealousy, envy, and the tendency to blame others for our shortcomings are, unfortunately, part of human nature and of the social/political landscape.  This is not going to change.  One of the roles of government is to protect us from our and our neighbors' baser instincts.  This constitutional obligation has had some notable failures e.g. slavery, Jim Crow, and the mass incarceration of Japanese-Americans.  What we presently are seeing is our Federal government not only failing to protect us from mob behavior but actually, pitchfork in hand, leading the mob.  Our sacred American principles and institutions are being desecrated and the desecrators are being praised and pandered to by the president of our country.
Part of the problem with this sort of thing is that it begets ideas that would otherwise be unthinkable; after a time these become acceptable.  The interment camps for the Japanese during WWII are an example.<br/><br/>Now, here in San Diego there is a proposal to round up the homeless and send them to a camp out in the desert.  The proposal wants to address the filth, drug use, crime and degradation associated with homeless encampments in and around the city.  Sending them to the desert will provide them with plenty of sunshine, fresh air (as if people living outside need more of this), real beds and sanitary facilities.  Happy, Happy, Joy, Joy!<br/><br/>In our changed political environment, it has apparently become acceptable to suggest depriving people of their rights and forcibly removing them to an encampment because they are inconvenient.    As the author points out, this is the real danger of what is happening, it starts with one group of undesirables and then move on to anyone who get in the way of the Powers That Be.  I believe that is the definition of a Police State.  
It doesn't end with immigrants.  Atty Gen. Sessions wants to resume the War on Drugs to the full extent of the law.  The War on Drugs from its inception has been used by law enforcement and prosecutors to selectively target, criminalize, and disenfranchise African American individuals and communities.  It is the "New Jim Crow", the title of Michelle Alexander's excellent book on the subject.  Eventually, no one will be safe.
There is a major logical flaw in this article.  All illegal aliens are in fact in violation of the law by their very presence.  By definition, this is not the country of their roots.  It is also important to consider why we have these laws and limits to restrict immigration.  We are a finite country that does not have unlimited resources, and our government has a constitutional duty to protect and prioritize the citizenry.  In other words, we can't just let in everybody who wants to come here, not without severely degrading the quality of life of those who are native citizens anyway.  If we don't deport people who come here without any right or authorization to do so, we have no ways or means to protect the livelihoods of those who do have roots here.
De minimis non curat lex.  Except when it is in the the interest of ideologues and authoritarians to make it so.  It's an accepted rule of general legal practice that laws and regulations left long in abeyance, which are revived to target particular persons who have neglected them just as everyoine else has (jaywalking, etc.), is an opening to tyranny.
The number of aliens crossing our southern border illegally is already far fewer than in any year of Obama's rule. He led from behind, from a position of weakness. One of the results was the death of Kathlyn Stynle, shot as she and her father were walking, buy an alien who had already been convicted of two felonies, had been deported five time for illegal entry, and had come in again.<br/>Without passing any new laws yet, Trump's mere presence as president seems to be working.<br/>I guess that Marine Corps 2nd Lieutenant training was right. Being a leader means leading. You lead from the front. You can't push a string.
It is true that a traffic fine is not really a crime.  But ahem, being illegally in the country IS a crime in Mexico (it is a felony) and it is also a crime here.  <br/><br/>There is something disturbing and amusing about the fact that we put Kim Davis in prison for failure to sign a marriage license and create sanctuary cities, protected by our courts no less, for people who are violating immigration laws.   How would you like it if there were sanctuary cities for people who refuse to serve to gays?<br/><br/>And let us face it, being deported and being put in a gas chamber are not the same thing, not by a long shot.<br/><br/>All of my doctoral students from abroad (and no doubt yours Jason) are in danger of being deported once they submit their dissertation.  That is the way the law works.  And they will NOT be going into gas chambers!<br/><br/>The law is the law and reflects common consensus whereby we all live in the same country and obey the same laws.  Once you decide that "those whom the liberals like" need not obey the law, you are opening a Pandora's box.  Be careful what comes out of that box.
Just don't miss an important part of all this, that America has a very valid right to have strong borders, and to deport those who violate her immigration laws. I write that as a very liberal American. Comprehensive immigration reform will include just such laws.<br/>Our immigration people do a tough job. It is a needed job, and it was done under Obama as it is under Trump. Sure, Trump cannot resist giving blasts on his dog whistles to keep some of his super-racist followers contributing, but don't blame the very hard working members of America's immigration services.<br/>Hugh Massengill, Eugene Oregon 
There is a difference between legal immigrants and illegal immigrants. Any crime, normally a felony with a legal victim (citizen or legal resident), would not have been committed if the illegal alien was not in the United States. <br/><br/>Most violent criminals are not rehabilitated and are recidivists. Since we already have enough native born criminals, removing the immigrant criminals who have completed their prison sentences makes sense. It is an effective way to protect US Citizens, at least in part, from these criminals. 
By the Justice Department's definition in Maslenjak v. US, we could declare Donald Trump a criminal and deport him. <br/><br/>What are we waiting for?
There's criminals sitting in the White House. When will they be held accountable?
Our country has a long history of this sort of discrimination, even without the optics of the Holocaust: <a href="http://digitalscholarship.tsu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1043&amp;context=jpmsp" title="http://digitalscholarship.tsu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1043&amp;context=jpmsp" target="_blank">http://digitalscholarship.tsu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1043&amp;amp;c...</a> AND <a href="http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/americas-true-history-of-religious-tolerance-61312684/" title="http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/americas-true-history-of-religious-tolerance-61312684/" target="_blank">http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/americas-true-history-of-religious...</a> . <br/><br/>Our laws, much more tolerant now but still subject to malevolent manipulation, have long been a tool in this process. They provide a framework of rules, but any attorney knows justice is not necessarily an intended outcome. Just does not equate with legal. The definition of justice is intensely problematic: <a href="https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/justice-virtue/" title="https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/justice-virtue/" target="_blank">https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/justice-virtue/</a> . There is so much to unpack on this subject. <br/><br/>To the point of the use of incarceration as a tool of repression--as a tool of economic growth (prisons as profit centers)--we have all sorts of problems. Our current president and his attorney general show signs of moving downhill on a dark road. 
To live and work here without authorization means tax evasion and likely ID fraud; both felonies for which citizens are prosecuted.<br/>Why should illegal aliens not face prosecution for violating the same laws? Why would lawless opportunism ever be considered acceptable let alone 'inclusive'?<br/>Enforcement of residency laws, work laws, tax laws put in place to protect and promote the general welfare of citizens is not Nazism and the parallel is so disingenuous, the backlash will continue to be outsized.
"It is worth noting that this tactic of dehumanization — referring to humans as animals — has historically been used to foment hatred and violence against chosen groups"<br/><br/>It may also be worth noting that these tactics have probably been recommended to Trump by Putin himself through Paul Manafort, or one of the other Putin cronies in Trumps coven of advisers.<br/>It IS a tactic, NOT an accident!<br/>SAD
Chief Justice John Roberts "reductio ad absurdum", hypothetical about speeding, during oral arguments, was an insult to the gravity of the Maslenjak case. Did Jason Stanley even bother to read the Supreme Court transcript of Maslenjak v.United States? The Maslenjak case was not about "a trivial misstatement during an immigration proceeding". In order obtain American citizenship, Ms. Maslenjak  lied about about her husband's role as a member of the unit that participated in the 1990's Serbian genocide against Muslims. She stated under oath that he was not a member of the Serbian military,when in fact he was a member of its most notorious unit. Since she would have been denied citizenship had she answered truthfully, her American citizenship was revoked. Does Jason Stanley really believe that lying about Ms. Maslenjak's husband's role in ethnic genocide is a "trivial misstatement", or didn't he exercise "due diligence" in examining the origin of John Roberts hypothetical?
Every nation has the right to decide who can come in and who cannot.  Without that right, nationhood becomes meaningless.  If someone comes in without permission, that is a violation of that nation's rights and laws and makes that person illegal.  Plain and simple.  It is the Left's inability to acknowledge this simple truth that makes people like myself upset.
Trump has been a criminal his whole adult life, stealing from people, not paying his fair share of taxes, housing discrimination, adultery, sexual abuses, etc.  Can we deport him somewhere?  Please!
If someone is here illegally, present without having properly been authorized to do so, then their actions are criminal, period.  This simpering mewling that it's mean to castigate people and expect them to take the consequences of their own actions and decisions is debasing the definitions of our language and muddies the debate by devolving into Clintonian discussions of what the meaning of the word "is," is.  They're not merely "undocumented," as if they just forest to do some silly paperwork; they're here illegally.
Holy Cow!  According to the resonant meaning the President is, himself, a criminal.  Who would have guessed?  No wonder he frightens so many people.  Its not a border wall, but the walls of a jail cell we need.  A lot cheaper too.
Criminals are often in the best of human company: Rosa Parks is a famous American criminal, and of course Socrates was the great criminal of democratic Athens because he did all those things that Trump demonizes as "fake news." Sadly, it is often the law abiding and law enforcing who are the most morally repugnant, as many more examples than the Nazis attest throughout history. Which direction is Trump and his vision of America leaning to: the healthily criminal ways of Parks and Socrates, or the rule-of-law ways of 1930 and 40s Germany and too many modern states, from Thailand to Turkey to the Philippines? 
Reductio ad Hitlerum is usually the last resort of reddit arguments.<br/><br/>Let's compare and contrast - economic refugees from central america cross many "safe" countries before illegally entering the USA. So - are they seeking economic opportunities or safety? If they are deported - are they sent to a concentration camp and almost certain death or a safe country whose sole problem is that it isn't the USA.<br/><br/>Criminals need not have permanent traits of criminality - that is why we allow folks to serve their sentence and re-enter society - nor do you need to commit multiple variations of the same crime to be convicted of a criminal act. I guess if you are a Sophist at heart, then you might attach some logic to that argument.<br/><br/>Finally - just in passing  what is the difference between injustice and "gross" injustice - other than hyperbole.
The Trump administration's war on immigrants is immoral, un-American and shameful.
"First they came for the Socialists, and I did not speak out—<br/>Because I was not a Socialist. <br/><br/>Then they came for the Trade Unionists, and I did not speak out—<br/>Because I was not a Trade Unionist. <br/><br/>Then they came for the Jews, and I did not speak out—<br/>Because I was not a Jew. <br/><br/>Then they came for me—and there was no one left to speak for me."<br/><br/>  --  Martin Niemoller
As odious as 45 is, he simply said out loud what Republicans have been dog whistling since the Southern Strategy.<br/><br/>The Republicans' problem was how in a democracy you get people to vote for politicians who want to help the rich get richer at the expense of everyone else. Solution: lie and fear-monger. <br/><br/>The mainstream Republicans had some limits for the sake of decency. 45 has no decency. His supporters don't care. They had to live with a black President for 8 years and they got their racist revenge. 
Use of the term "criminal" to mean someone of less moral worth than ordinary citizens is a false distinction. Kind or cruel is more important. A person may lie repeatedly, touch genitals without consent, only rent property to white people or rouse crowds to anger and fear without any criminal record. <br/><br/>I have a careless driving conviction, more serious than speeding. Someone could describe me, making no false statements though I hope giving a false impression, making me sound thoroughly reprehensible. I like to think I am one of the good people, but really no-one is safe from being monstered like that. 
We should remember that when the president's grandfather changed his mind about living in America, and tried to return to Germany, they would not have him because of his criminal record there as a draft dodger -- something the Germans took more seriously than America did when his grandson also dodged the draft.
So telling that not once does Mr. Stanley ever mention the centuries long "dehumanization" and "criminalization" of African Americans, who were here before and AT the founding of the United States.<br/><br/>The first person to die in the Boston Massacre, on behalf of American "freedom" from Great Britain, was a black/mixed race man, Crispus Attucks, let us not forget, yet again and again, up through our present day, African Americans have experienced and endured relentless narratives, policies, and practices of dehumanization, denial of citizenship, exclusion, oppression, criminalization, and outright state-sanctioned murder. <br/><br/>Why does Professor Stanley never once cite any of this? WHY? Does he not care if the dehumanized person's skin is brown or black? Remember, Hitler admitted taking tips from the US brutal policies of racial segregation, and forced dispossession of Native Americans!
ICE doesn’t arrest anyone for petty crimes such as traffic violations or for more serious crimes such as selling narcotics, robbery, assault, rape or murder. It only arrests people for violations of immigration and customs law. One-hundred percent of the 21,263 unauthorized immigrants ICE arrested between January and March were arrested for violating immigration laws, not for other crimes. ICE has no jurisdiction over other types of crime.
Does cheating on ones taxes constitute criminality?  If so Mr Trump as well as the majority of the banking community should be deported. <br/><br/>Maybe the President is on the right track, we just haven't applied this harsh law across all economic lines yet...
These articles are frightening...I took a course in college 40 years on totalitarianism and Trump is mirroring all the characteristics dictators employ to gain power and maintain power. I think we have the institutional tools in place to withstand Trump's assault on democracy, but, along with those tools, we will need some courageous politicians from both parties, to make sure those tools are not locked up in a governmental tool box. 
And there are other layers to this onion. For instance the break-up of families, children who can stay while their parents are (subject to even if not) removed. And the fact that a mere accusation can qualify as reason for removal.
This is indeed eerily familiar to the dialog from the Trumpanzees - that a crime is anything they decide is a crime, so as to justify inhuman and inhumane behaviour towards those they would drive out.
I read a report that the current Mrs. Trump had been in the US for several years before she was allowed to work.  I read in the same report that a modeling agency had made a payment of about $20,000 to her during that time.  Lets let the Trumps live by their rules, she goes home for being an immigrant that breaks the law and looses her rights to due process as a citizen for failing to disclose her unauthorized work on her citizenship application
Demonization of "the other" is the first step towards totalitarianism.  What Steve Bannon knows from history, Donald Trump knows instinctively: Fear and hatred are powerful unifying forces.  Nothing brings a people together like a common enemy.  In the face of this enemy and in a time of "war" they are willing to set aside their moral principles, set aside their civil rights and do whatever they consider necessary to protect themselves.<br/>I'm not convinced that Trump has a master plan, I sense he is just bumbling along, but there are others in the administration who are willing to whip up fear and hatred in hopes of undermining our democracy and pursuing a far right wing agenda.  Complacency is not an option.
Criminal in meaning begs the question as to whose laws are broken. It need not be limited to legal statutes. The ideals of American, its foundation and its reason for being, these are governing principles whose violation is criminal in the sense that they ignore the Constitution that office holders swear to uphold. Those who bandy words should take care lest they be applied in return.
The greatest danger that President Trump poses is his authoritarian tendencies. His sympathy towards authoritarianism is often made clear by his support for other heads of states with similar dangerous records. While his success is limited by incompetency and laziness, one must be vigilant. 
From a pure examination of both sides of the issues of those here to work without legal status why is this administration not punishing those who hire them? Isn't it likely that even Mr Trump has done so even if he has kept the 'crime' at arms length behind a wall of contracts? Does he forget his family immigrants status or that of his current wife?<br/>Does the civil rights violation of his father and his own in housing mean he should be deported?<br/>Hypocrisy is a sad thing in anyone but in a president it is despicable. 
Over the past couple of years, most thinking people, have learned how hard it is to honestly present facts to and use logic with peole that simply don't want to or aren't capable of understanding them. So many Americans are simply not able to engage their own intellect to determine who, what, or why about their own safety, situation, or status. The overwhelming majority of undocumented people in this country are in search of a better life and are willing to do just about anything to achieve that. They work the jobs (provided by the capitalists) that the "hardworking Americans" don't want to do. The notion that deporting people because of their legal status is going to change anything in the life of most Americans is foolish at best and horribly ignorant at worst. 
 “the government may revoke the citizenship of Americans who made even trivial misstatements in their naturalization proceedings,” including not disclosing a criminal offense of any kind, even if there was no arrest. To test the severity of that position, Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr., confessed to a crime — driving 60 miles an hour in a 55-mile-an-hour zone many years ago without being caught. He then asked if a person who had not disclosed such an incident in his citizenship application could have his citizenship revoked. The lawyer answered, yes"<br/>As Justice Roberts rightfully concluded no one would be safe from this law. The drafters of these laws must be very untouchable and arrogant to feel so safe that this law or the next similar one they concoct will not be used against them at some point when the wheel turns and their position, or that of their loved ones, in society changes - as it will. Surely self preservation if not a regard for fellow human beings is enough to give these people pause for thought? I guess they are just following someones orders - an excuse we've heard before. I wonder where Gorsuch stands on this? Hopefully with Justice Roberts, but he came off as a bit too detached from humanity my liking so I have doubts.  
"Demeaning the priceless value of citizenship?" Justice Kennedy speaks as if we live in a time when everything is not a commodity, to be bargained away, devalued, or ignored as fake news. This Administration was erected on a platform of devaluing the citizenship of Barack Obama. Trump demeans every organ and convention of government, from checks and balances, to an independent judiciary, to a free press, on a daily basis. The value of American citizenship indeed has a price these days, and it is falling rapidly. Without the devalued conventions and traditions Trump demeans and discards, American citizenship will be only as valuable as what remains of our Constitution, unread and disrespected by our preening, posturing President.
The process of a political order (a society in total or a particular aspect of it, a political party within) stoking fear of immigration, or expelling illegal aliens or even revoking citizenship by using the term "criminal" to describe such people?<br/><br/>Obviously if a society has this problem it can be looked at in two primary ways: We can view the elements in society who are using the term "criminal" in such an irresponsible and disproportionate sense as extremists within society and they should be discouraged from using such strong language to describe what is essentially not such a serious problem to society to go to such extremes, or the society by being lax and having allowed itself to take in so many disparate elements (immigrants) that it is losing cohesion has found itself in the situation of necessarily calling the immigrants criminals to salve its conscience, because after all, can a society which has been so lax as to allow itself to be overrun simply admit it made a mistake and must now expel people?<br/><br/>In short, if a society finds itself using the term criminal more and more usually and loosely and strongly and directed especially at immigrants in society, it is not such a simple matter as just blaming right wing extremists in society. We have also to ask if the left wing, which has allowed such immigration, has got itself into such a bind by its laxity that it has caused reaction which can be expressed only by the term "criminal"...Plenty of blame to go around...
Trump is not a real president just name only because he dislikes the document he has sworn to uphold. The constitution of the United States.  How very scary for all Americans not just immigrants.
What about civil law? All those bankruptcies. We have "someone who violates a law" repeatedly in office. If only we could expel Trump based on removal of his citizenship. Bad precedent but fair is fair. Perhaps the president of Mexico will take him in. 
We are all "criminals". Trump is really saying, if you were not born in the US you are not welcome here. Which is the message that most immigrants, naturalized citizens or not, are getting. The consequences for American society will be slow, but immense.
We the people... are all in jeopardy when a simple signature by a President can classify anyone as a criminal. We better pray our Supreme Court holds up better than the high courts in Turkey where they just locked up 40,000 newly identified "criminals".<br/>The biggest criminals have been in congress for decades... Thank goodness for term limits on the presidency.<br/><br/>Congress will do more with a limit to their time in office. Two terms for the Senators and four terms for Reps.
Great essay. The parallels drawn are accurate. Those in the US who seek the expulsion of more than 11 million immigrants do so mostly out of fear of being displaced in the workforce, rather than being assaulted on the streets. As the essay points out, being evicted from one's home -- even if it's voluntary -- is not easy. The men and women who left their homes for a strange land in the hope of a better life, as anyone with exposure to these people can see, are among the hardest working and strong-willed people on the planet. Most of the folks who are in favor of their expulsion, I would argue, recognize, at least subconsciously, that they lack the discipline and fortitude to compete with them for a place in the economy. Trump's rhetoric is a lifeline to the millions who believe that being born American or being white automatically qualifies them to be handed good-paying jobs that require no skills and a modest work ethic, at best.
I agree with the premise of the article, but I think that politicians are not the only group to blame. Sure, politicians take advantage anti-immigrant sentiments for political gain, but the real problem is that many normal people have anti-immigrant sentiments to begin with. While there is the occasional horror story about how tough it can be to get here and stay here, people do not know a lot about the normal day to day lives of immigrants. Perhaps if more people understood that immigrants are like the rest of us we would have a less anti-immigrant voting population in the first place. Politicians would need to find another false issue to pump...
Articles like this give rise to heart felt feelings in most all of us, but never get down to a central question or point: should there be rules for entering our country (any country) and should they be ignored or tossed out the window for some people, and not for others. And if so, who decides.<br/><br/>Should someone, anyone, simply be able to come across the border and demand citizenship. I detest trump, but on this issue these are valid questions that writers like this one never discuss. And maybe many people here illegally shouldn't be called criminals, but just described as being in violation of our laws.<br/><br/>Further, shouldn't the US like every country have entry rules that are enforced uniformly. Congress should determine each year how many can come in, from where, and what the requirements are. Typically today why do some follow the ten or more year process legally, and in the minds of many others apparently don't have to. How is that fair.
The word "criminal" does have a literal meaning, as Jason Stanley points out, but it is not a very precise one. A criminal is someone who commits a crime, but not every violation of the law counts as a crime. Breaches of contract and torts are violations of the law, but they are not usually considered as crimes.<br/><br/>What counts as a crime in a certain jurisdiction, at least in the technical sense, depends on the criminal code for that jurisdiction. In Canada, e.g., speeding is not a crime, it is provincial motor vehicle act offense. The state (i.e., the province) can punish those who violate such laws, but they do not count as crimes. E.g., mens rea is not relevant for conviction of a speeding offence. And the punishments are limited, usually consisting in fines or suspension of the right to drive. Otoh, impaired driving, i.e., operating or having care or control of a motor vehicle while  impaired by alcohol or a drug, is a criminal offense and can result in a lengthy prison term.<br/><br/>One of the difficulties in the US is that there is a confusing melange of federal and state criminal law. In Canada, by contrast, the criminal code falls exclusively under the jurisdiction of the federal government; the provinces do not have separate criminal codes. 
There have been many lessons in history to look away. The xenophobic remarks are establishing the parameters not only for deportation but for citizenship reversals. Fortunately, the media, the social media, and the internet, in general, are tools to expose and oppose the propagandistic brainwash of this administration.<br/><br/>On the other hand, I can safely point out that any public official who abuses his or her government post to enrich himself or herself is entering the world of criminal behavior.
Thanks for this article.<br/><br/>We also need a human rights distinction between criminal infractions in the streets and criminal actions in the suites of governments and corporations.
Having served as police for nearly a quarter of a century, I retired with the term "criminal" firmly defined in my consciousness. A person, for example, who parks illegally and gets a ticket is not a criminal; we must calculate discretion into an evaluation, and your point about malice is well taken as it speaks to intent. <br/><br/>The current "campaign" against criminal aliens also has a racial component. Even though the posture of many of the 62 million who voted for him (as opposed to the nearly 72 million who voted for someone else - let's not forget the 5.5 for Johnson, etc.) is raucous support for this virtual cleansing exercise, one wonders about race. If we were talking about 11 million Caucasian, Western European folks here "illegally" would there be the same standards for deportation? I doubt it.
The federal government and each state have criminal codes that are generally similar.  The Model Penal Code sets the standard which makes for crimes that are reasonably uniform across the country. We have a shared sense of what is a serious crime and what is trivial and arbitrarily distorting our shared standards undermines our social norms, violating the system by which we distinguish the good from the bad.
This business of making anyone with minor "criminal record" subject to extreme penalties could be twisted around to apply to any of us who go against the regime's favored policies.  Citizens whose great grandparents were born here, like me, could be swept up in a crackdown.  
I wish during his confirmation hearings Gorsuch was probed on issues like this. <br/><br/>Some indirect questions. He had some strident views that seemed to lead to interpret the Constitution for his political aims<br/><br/>Along those lines I have to believe he would have been in the majority for the Dred Scott decision, and fear where he would stand on this.
Professor Stanley's article presents a “Tale of Two Cities. It shows a fully functional Supreme Court operating at its best. It also reveals a totally dysfunctional population behaving at its worst. When people identified as liberals hear about an immigrant being deported for a traffic violation, they tend to be deeply disturbed by the horror of the situation. On the other hand, by the cheering seen at Trump rallies when deportation is brought up, Trump supporters appear to be taking delight – even pleasure – in the plight of the deported.<br/><br/>In fact, this dichotomy probably explains every policy difference between those labeled as liberal and those labeled as conservative. Liberals tend to support actions that will help ease suffering of those less fortunate.  While conservatives tend to support actions that exacerbate or even promote suffering of those less advantaged.
To answer the question in the final sentence of this piece: those in power and<br/>their donors and friends remain safe and profit from the program, just as the perpetrators of the Inquisition did.
A person makes a conscious decision to walk into a foreign country, knowing that it is against the law, yet does it anyway. Establishes identification, takes a job, and tries to remain under the radar, but knows all along that they are at risk for being discovered and possibly deported. Meanwhile, the list of people around the world sit or return to the embassy or consulate to check on their application to come here. They can't just walk into the country because their country is overseas. They wait and wait. Immigration is a complicated issue, made more so by the millions of illegal immigrants already here, many of whom are good people just wanting to have a better life for themselves and their families.
I've read enough comments on immigration pieces in the NYT to know that the writer has not staved off the inevitable "they're criminals because they broke the law to come here." The writer here supposes that an immigrant is at least actively pursuing a citizenship that is then snatched away. But immigrants in danger in the US are those who are barred from even seeking citizenship, no matter how long they've lived here, because they entered the country nonprocedurally.<br/><br/>I know, I know: you want me to use the word "illegally." That's because the real philosophical question is whether the movements of human beings should be restricted because of artificial, imaginary lines on the earth. If the border were real, we wouldn't need a wall, and we wouldn't need to worry about the environmental consequences or the engineering challenges of putting a barricade in place where the laws of nature have decreed none should be.<br/><br/>The problem is conflating human rights and civil rights, as if one leads naturally to the other. Human rights are those that are essential to our flourishing as the kinds of creatures we are, like access to food, water, shelter, and getting to do what you're cut out for. Civil rights are those that are constructed by law and pertain to our citizenship, such as voting. Many of our problems in the US arise from allowing law written for the haves to constrain the natural rights of the have-nots. We're so used to it we don't even realize how fragile our own status is.
The right-wing has, in its blogs, long made the claim that every "illegal" has committed a crime by crossing the boarder and is, therefore, a criminal. The Trump administration takes up that claim and turns it into policy. There is no argument that one can make to such people. In their minds, a criminal is one who has committed a crime; all who came illegally have committed a crime and, no matter their other behavior over years or even decades, must "pay" for that crime. <br/><br/>It is horrible and unjust, but unfortunately the country has elected a man who is perfectly willing to believe that sinister view of the desperate seeking people. We will not change the view of the right-wing or of Trump, so we must stand against it any way we can - offering sanctuary no matter the price and bringing lawsuits (and supporting those who do) seem to be the most effective means. 
The author's intention is to warn of the slippery slope setting such a precedent can cause, not that both situations are identical.
Don't you see?  This is how it all starts.
Mr. Case,  I fear you missed the part of this essay about proportionality and human rights. Maybe you need to read it again. 
That is, sadly, true for many, but not for all. That is why I don't buy not judging people by modern standards, instead of the standards of their time. There have always been people during those times who fought for the rights of others or helped in other ways because it was the right to do.
You are right. We may go on ignoring this until it's too late.
Lesa--We might need your services if trump and his thugs try to eliminate the 1st amendment, as was threatened over the weekend.
If Mexican's are fleeing their native Mexico and moving to the US, then you have our modern day Nazis mixed up.
Do you have any idea of what it costs to obtain citizenship?  You need a qualified immigration attorney; you need money for court costs and fees; you need to pay either rent, or property taxes while you pursue your case.  I had a friend, an engineer from China.  She came over on a work visa; she worked at Columbia University as a programmer; she maintained their computer system.  The total for her citizenship was $10,000.  She had to save enough to pay that in cash, also her attorney and court costs.  She had a Mercedes from a divorce; she sold that and bought a run down condo in Queens.  Where will a nanny, housekeeper, motel worker, meat packing worker, restaurant worker, dishwasher, field worker et al. get that kind of money?  If you want to punish someone, look to the employer, not to the vulnerable people being exploited for low wages and no benefits.
I wish the aboriginals would start deporting their illegal aliens.
And your discussion of deporting illegal aliens is irrelevant in the context of an article talking about revoking citizenship of fully naturalized citizens
There are good reasons for our current immigration laws and until these laws are changed I expect to see them enforced.<br/><br/>Meanwhile you are free to contact your Congressman and express your desire to see the laws changed.<br/><br/>After all,  it's a free country.
What about Melania Trump? Didn't she work here illegally without authorization to work?
Well, it would be better to be an illegal alien in Brazil. After all, they have had the good sense to have two periods in the last 20 years that gave illegal aliens opportunities to become legal citizens. Australia has the very sensible law of actually fining the employers of illegal aliens, making them responsible for making sure their workers work have the necessary work permits (including updating them). On the other hand, the attitude you express is more in line with Libya's Gaddafi who said in 2008 "No resident without a legal visa will be excluded" when he announced plans to expel all illegal foreigners. So, are you saying the oh-so-exceptional USA should follow the example of a dictator, or should we emulate other countries that actually try to address the problem? And if you expel all of those people, are you volunteering to work in agriculture to harvest food or in a meat packing plant, or to clean office buildings and homes?
Or, maybe we are simply in need of cheap labor. Immigrants have provided that in countries all over the world, pretty much forever.  Want to see the end of supermarket produce aisles? Throw out the immigrants. Need a new roof on your house? There are many places in the US where that calls for immigrant workers spending days in the hot sun spreading tar. Like having a weekly lawn service? That's pretty much up to immigrants to make happen.  Chickens cleaned and ready for the oven? That would would be immigrants doing the slaughtering and cleaning.  It's a long list. We actually do have to careful who we deport. We'll not make make America great again if we have no food to eat.
It was the Obama's henchmen that brought the case. Trump inherited it at the Supreme Court.
Obama went after those with violent criminal records.  He gave the rest a path to citizenship.  Obama was the least punitive President compared to Trump, even Clinton.  Now we have a crook and a man who admires Putin in the Oval Office.  His products are made in China.  He is as phony as that comb over, and his golf trips to Florida where he cheats.  He costs the county where he flies in on AF One; he costs NYC to protect his far flung family; his kids costs the taxpayers money when they fly with SS protection to inspect business interests in Mumbai, India and Peru.
Maybe. Trump has said he will challenge in court the principle that if you were born here, you're a citizen. 
Many on the right want to get rid of birthright citizenship.
Sure it could. Did you miss the part of the article where they almost passed a law in Switzerland in 2016 to expel second and third generation Swiss born residents found guilty of a few parking tickets? If the oh so reasonable Swiss could almost pass such a law, in the rabid political climate we have here in the USA, such a law is not unthinkable. There are efforts to do away with birthright citizenship, after all.
How would you feel in this case: You live with your husband and children in El Salvador in the 1980s, when the U.S. is supporting the murderous Contras. The Contras murder your husband, who works with Archbishop Oscar Romeo, also assassinated. Then they rape you, as your young children watch. You know that your must escape with your children, but the U.S. does not accept immigrants from El Salvador. You and your children manage to travel, in great danger, to a "sanctuary church" in the U.S., where you live illegally for a time. (The church accepts the risk of harboring your family.) The years pass the political situation in El Salvador changes as the Contras' brutality is exposed, and you and your family become naturalized--and grateful and devoted--U.S. citizens. Fast forward to 2017. You and your children, and now grandchildren, remain very active members of the church that allowed you this chance, as well as exceedingly productive citizens of your adopted country.<br/>You too may have ancestors who fled a country which threatened their lives and/or well-being. I know I have ancestors who fled England in 1630 because of persecution.<br/>Do you have a heart?
'invaded', 'illegals', 'committing a crime', 'face reckoning'. You're getting the nomenclature off just fine. Makes it so much easier.
By your measure, anyone whose ancestors weren't here before the 15th century should be sent back to Europe, Asia, or Africa.  "Illegals" leave their countries of origin because life there is untenable. Who invited YOU, Marika?
Well yes - there are many reasons why for someone to be a refugee.  Many kinds of persecution they might be fleeing, and singling out one particular reason is discriminatory.  
Singling out people of a specific religion is unconstitutional, period. It's horrific that the Jews at the port weren't allowed to disembark, and that denial was more a matter of anti-Semitism than anything else. It isn't only Christians that are being persecuted or harmed. Being from the "wrong" flavor of Islam is also dangerous, for example. Although sides seem to be taken in most contemporary conflicts based on religion, the conflicts are really about land and power, as was the real reason for the conflicts in Ireland, even though it looked like it was a Catholic vs. Protestant conflict. Are you willing to defend Muslims in the US? They are minorities, and they are now being targeted more than ever by certain groups. If you're willing to defend one minority, but not another, well, you know what that makes you.
You're kidding, right?
Trump hasn’t made or proposed any changes to immigration law. He proposes to enforce Immigration and Nationalization the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act, which President Bill Clinton signed into law in 1996. These acts, which passed with board bipartisan support in both houses, calls for the deportation of foreign nationals unlawfully present in the United States. The “Take Care Clause of the Constitution tasks president to take care that laws passed by Congress are faithfully executed.
"We took full advantage of those illegal immigrants since people started over staying their visas or people crossing Mexican border for low paid jobs. "<br/><br/>I hired a landscaper to update my front yard.  I asked him to verify he had only workers who were legally allowed to work.  He became indignant at my asking this question.  BTW, his crew was made up entirely of Mexicans.<br/><br/>So you have the liberal guilt perpetual motion machine at work here.
Legal immigrants have included Nazis and war criminals, aided by the US government in full knowledge of who these people were. So tell me again how merely crossing the border illegally is an indefensible crime?<br/>People don't just decide cavalierly to cross the border illegally. They would much prefer to come here legally, but the current immigration system is not fair or just, and it isn't effective for the various labor, academic and other needs of this country.
Sorry, no. Your comment is itself based on a mischaracterization (unfactual). This article discusses the case of revoking already-granted naturalization -- i.e., legal immigration -- for failure to disclose, even through good faith oversight, some past incident of "breaking the law." No distinction between misdemeanors vs crimes vs inadvertent wrong-side-if-the-law mistakes, just revocation of granted citizenship. Illegal immigrants aren't the topic of thus article, so don't bring that in.
Conservatives seem to be hard liners on everything except themselves,
So what's the misquote and the "correct" one?
Will you share the 'misquote' with the rest of us?
Wow, you're a visitor in this country and brag about disobeying its laws.  Perhaps we should coin a new term:  The Ugly Brit.<br/><br/>Since you get away with it, so should all others and you've managed to bring up your lily white skin as some sort of indictment.   Perhaps therapy would help.
NL452KH so you agree that not disclosing a criminal offense in your citizenship application ((jaywalking, not picking up after your dog) even if there was no arrest is sufficient cause to be de-naturalized and deported? Because that's what this administration is proposing. This has nothing to do with 'liberal sanctimony' and everything to so with authoritarianism. "If the administration has its way, he said, “the government will have the opportunity to denaturalize anyone they want.” Be afraid, be very afraid.
Illegal immigrants come in all races from all over the world. Irish, Chinese, Central American, if you are here illegally you are breaking the law. By the way, Ms. Lily White, many border patrol agents are not white, perhaps they would look askance at you, strange accent and all. I find your comment particularly funny, as the most racist and anti-semitic place I ever lived was Seattle and the Northwest.
"Still on this illegal immigration kick I see. This is and always has been a smoke screen in tough economic times. "<br/><br/>Tough economic times?  According to the NY Times and Krugman things have been economically great in the US for the last several years.<br/>Yeah, and some folks have a thing about obeying the law.
You yourself said that they prevent people from gaining citizenship.  Thats different from revoking.
It's not Nazi Germany to deny foreigners the right to become American citizens. Stop that. 
wrong on every count<br/><br/>also, don't be drawn into the fake idea that all hispanics, or anyone who has crossed over our border with Mexico, is a Mexican. that's both racist and wrong.  and being sent back to the murderous gang chaos of a place like El Salvador is a death sentence comparable to being a sent to a concentration camp.
If El Salvador is such an awful place then perhaps your outrage should be directed at those who run it. 
"don't be drawn into the fake idea that all hispanics, or anyone who has crossed over our border with Mexico, is a Mexican. that's both racist and wrong."<br/><br/>You mean there are Central Americans illegally entering the US via the Mexican border?  Are those the same Central Americans Mexico does not allow to crossover to the US? 
Meanwhile trivializing violations against of people of color never gets old for Trumpists.
Congress made illegal immigration and posing as a citizens to obtain jobs felony offenses because they undermine the nation’s ability to provide work for its citizens, control its borders and regulate immigration. ICE doesn’t arrest anyone for traffic tickets or crimes like theft, assault, robbery, rape, or murder. ICE has no jurisdiction over these types of crimes. It only arrests people for violations of immigration or custom laws. 
Please read the article. The Trump administration is proposing that anyone who is a naturalized American citizen could be denaturalized and deported if it can be shown that they omitted disclosing ANY criminal offense of ANY kind in their application for citizenship, even if there was no arrest. So if I forgot to disclose that I sometimes walked the dog without a leash, I could be stripped of citizenship and deported. To quote Chief Justice Roberts "If the administration has its way, he said, “the government will have the opportunity to denaturalize anyone they want.” That's scary.
DUI are traffic violations. I don't consider speeding and drunk driving harmless.
Stop blaming the US for the holocaust. Just stop it. Sending Mexicans back to Mexico is not behaving like Nazis. Liberals are utterly irrational on this issue. 
FDR was facing a potential world war with Germany; he listened to Churchill who warned him that allowing Jews in would make it impossible to deal with Hitler.  So, he kept Jews out; Hitler was still impossible to deal with; we ended up allied with Stalin in order to hold the line in the East.  Stalin also murdered Jews; Ukraine slaughtered Jews.  Millions of Jews were murdered in WWII; we did not protect them; we didn't bomb the railways leading to the Camps.  We didn't protect our Japanese citizens; we sent them camps in the Mid-West where many of them died.  I really hope we are not seeing another xenophobic episode in this unhappy history. 
There are two problems with your reasoning. First, you want to send Mexicans here illegally back to Mexico, but what about someone here illegally from Canada or Ireland? Do you feel just as strongly about deporting them? If not, please refrain from calling others hypocrites.<br/>Second, have you ever lived in an area where hundreds of thousands are killed in battles between the government and drug cartels? An area hit by famine? If not, how can you judge that sending a person back to those conditions isn't just as likely to result in their death as being send to a concentration camp was in Nazi Germany?
Deporting violent criminals seems like a good way to prioritize it.  
What does “leftist” have to do with this?
If your arguments are good, they should stand on their own and not the slippery slope argument which rightists use to lock up tens of thousands for possessing marijuana and to defend the rights of the mentally ill to purchase assault rifles.
Spell check strikes again. Bannon and Gorka.
"America First" was Charles Limberg - Isolationist, yes. Anti-War, yes. Fascist?  Sorry your making that up.  
Persons are being locked up for years waiting for their cases to be heard, because of the backlogs in the criminal justice system. And it's not just non-citizens, it's people who can't afford $3000 bail (for example) much less a decent lawyer. Yeah it's not "the same" as Auschwitz, but when you constantly encounter the type of apathy that is so common in this society and realize that these systemic failures are not going away any time soon, mostly because nobody gives a damn, can you blame the Times for trying to get people to pay attention by making comparisons to Nazi Germany?
Japanese American citizens were held in concentration camps; I worked with a man who was a child in one of those camps.  His family had their assets and home seized; they were American citizens.  Central Americans who are escaping criminal drug gangs in El Salvador will die if we send them back.  We have been a safe harbor for the most part, except for the Jews, Japanese, Chinese excluded in the '20's.  And, now whichever group this blowhard in D.C. decides to exclude. 
"It's interesting to see that the comments section of this article is being subjected to massive trolling by right-wingers trying to simulate some kind of popular revulsion against immigrants."<br/><br/>Get a grip.  All the un-educated, pot bellied white males in flyover country are magically called to participate in the NY Times Comment section when illegal immigration is the topic, right.<br/>Or just maybe folks aren't as aligned with your POV as your imagination leads you to believe.
so sad and so true
Lamont, <br/><br/>Comparing slaves with those freely here in violation of our laws is why the left deserves to lose. 
The response is ridiculous.  The only people who deserve to be here are people here legally.  Do you want open borders? Anyone can just come? Who is going to pay for hat? Somehow I think not you.  The suggestion that racism is involved here is a typical liberal response to everything and cheapens the cause.
What part of most people come here from poor countries to escape misery do you not understand.
Please.  Wanting secure borders that are controlled by the Federal Government is not an indication of anyone being cruel.<br/>Fortunately for you Canada has a large buffer between it and Mexico.
But doesn't referring to a defendant as "Defendant" instead of "Mr. So-and-so" work to dehumanize the defendant? And doesn't calling them "Mr. So-and-so" work to remind the jury that the person in front of them is a person and therefore is theoretically worthy of respect and compassion much more than a non-human thing? So isn't calling that person a "Defendant" work to dehumanize them as much or almost as much as calling that person a "dog" or a "snake?"
@Jackie: No, in my opinion "defendant" is a generic way of addressing the alleged offender, and is tradition more so than meant in any way derogatory or dehumanizing and it protects the anonimity of the accused. Calling people "dogs" or "snakes" however, is extremely derogatory and dehumanizing.
"Actually he spoke of Mexican immigrants who were rapists."<br/><br/>And he made certain to ensure that white Americans understood that he was speaking _only_ of Mexican immigrants whom he knew _personally_ to be rapists, in order to make it patently clear that it was not his intention, by any means. to blacken - uh, I mean, "non-whiten," of course - the reputation of the Mexican people as a whole.
"And no wonder. Democratic party orthodoxy holds that there's no difference between US citizens born abroad and immigrants here without permission,..."<br/><br/>If that were true then Senator Obama in 2008 would not have co-authored a senate resolution declaring GOP candidate John McCain duly qualified to be elected president under the natural born citizen provision of the US Constitution.
I don't think so. The example he gave of minor speeding is technically a crime, or at least breaking the law, but hardly criminal. <br/><br/>You have to be pretty desperate to find wrongdoing if you get down to that level. And note that about a quarter of those arrested and in line for deportation have no record of lawbreaking of any kind. Torturous logic, to me, is saying that any lawbreaking, no matter how minor, is reason for deportation, and that membership in a group is sufficient cause for targeting. If you're going to target people here illegally, no matter what, then why use the language of criminality? Why not be straightforward?<br/><br/>Every country has a right to protect its borders and to have requirements for citizenship, but to not only deport, but to do so under the pretense of ridding us of a criminal element, seems cowardly to me.
@Lamont:  I think those are civil offenses not criminal ones.
I had the absurd thought that the States should start passing laws to expel anybody living within their borders, but born in another State, that commits any crime (even jaywalking). After all, that person is taking a job that a someone born in their State could have! Doesn't matter if the rest of their family was born in that State or if they pay taxes or otherwise contribute to the community or lived the majority of their lives in that area. They have committed a crime within State borders! The precedent exits in this country, after all. During Colonial times, if a family became indigent in a town they were not born in, the good township authorities would cart them back to their hometown so their own town wouldn't have to bear the responsibility of providing for that family.
Not true... Their parents could be sent back because they came here illegally. Parents normally would choose to take their children back with them even though the children have a legal right to stay.
The dreamers represent less than two percent of all immigrants presently in the US. It's reasonable that they be allowed to stay, as they did not come of their own volition. 
There are many at risk illegal aliens who have fled drug gangs in El Salvador; they have fled rape, torture and the threat of murder if they don't join a gang.  Are we going to send these people back, too?
Steve the Nazis started small too, it grew to the horrific history we know today. When the rules that these deportations are supposed to be following are being stretched, rewritten &amp; bastardized we as a country have helped another Autocratic leader decide who is fit to live here and who isn't. He set publicly that only criminals would be deported but when they stand in wait for a child to turn 18, on his actual birthday no less, and then arrest him and place him in adult detention, we have another leader who is backhanding his own public policy to meet a quota he promised but can't deliver on. Where are the criminals who committed felonies? We're not hearing about them...cause they're not meeting his HUGE quota so ICE is making the policy fit their needs not the laws needs.<br/>When the Supreme Court has issues with it...and it leans right...we should be worried where this will leave us in history. We may exceed the atrocities of Hitler...don't think it's possible?  We already have a leader who isn't playing by the rules or the constitution and his followers are just as blind as Hitler s party was!
"You lose your moral high ground when you stoop that low."<br/><br/>What if you stoop only low enough to enforce Jim Crow and condone lynching, in order to protect the virtue of white women?
"Are we not supposed to be ruled by law not whim, and are our public officials not therefore obligated to enforce those laws? If they do not enforce those laws are they not at fault and derelict in their duties? I believe that they are."<br/><br/>That's why Jim Crow worked so well. Those laws were taken _seriously_!
@Vincent: Yes, it is the law that concerns me. Given that our immigration laws have not been enforced for many years, and with both political parties guilty of not having done so, then perhaps we need LEGAL means to grant some leniency for those who were lured here, as undocumented migrants, by those who wished to exploit them for cheap labor. That, however, should -- in my opinion -- be a temporary solution to sort out our current mess. In the longer term we do need immigration laws that make sense and that are enforced. We must limit immigration to OUR national needs and to the number of immigrants that we can afford and absorb. Otherwise chaos results and immigration becomes not immigration but invasion. 
United Fruit almost destroyed Mexico; it has never really recovered.  The drug trade between the U.S. and El Salvador is ignored.  Weapons dealers smuggle arms into Mexico for a profit.  Our borders have never been "clean".
BoRegard:  I didn't see your moral and/ or financial arguments in favor of such arguments.    
So those here illegally from Canada or Ireland can stay, is basically what you are saying. 
All an employer is required to do under the law is look at a Social Security card and get a completed I-9 form. Illegal "immigrants" supply forged Social Security cards (every bit as genuine looking as yours) and perjure themselves to complete an I-9. As a result, employers hire illegal workers every day and break no laws. We need mandatory eVerify. So far, the only states that have pushed this through are Republican states.<br/><br/><a href="http://www.lawlogix.com/e-verify-map/" title="http://www.lawlogix.com/e-verify-map/" target="_blank">http://www.lawlogix.com/e-verify-map/</a>
As there are visa programs established for the professions you name, it should be OK for the employers to use them to bring in necessary workers legally.
"German Jews, of course, had every right to be there [in Germany]." <br/><br/>According to whose laws? Those of Hitler, Goehring, and Goebbels?
We may be naturally tribal, but in the U.S. most of us are mutts.  Ask yourself, what is your family tree like?  Is it pure anything? Probably not.  It may be true that immigrants from different countries and backgrounds initially tend to flock together in certain neighborhoods or businesses, but within a generation or two, significant numbers are building families outside of their own "tribe."  This is the plurality of culture and religion that has made America great, but that continues to confuse and challenge us because we don't actually have many truly "American" shared values that all of us agree on without even having to think about it.  People who live in nations where cultural norms have been widely understood and shared for centuries generally have an easier time with collective decision-making, sometimes terrible ones, sometimes important and necessary ones.  But, if we recognize our plurality as a strength and work toward better defining and articulating our shared values  then we can all be part of the tribe and have a better sense of which way is is up and which is down, both seem to be up for discussion right now.
I disagree. Multiculturalism is not the historic goal of US immigration policy. Assimilate.
"the people of Switzerland"<br/><br/>Which "people of Switzerland," Your? The Germans? The Italians? The French? The Romauntsch? The Catholics? The Calvinists?<br/><br/>"Humankind has been tribal since its inception."<br/><br/>How do you know that, Your? Were you there?<br/><br/>"Blacks, Indians, Chinese, Europeans, Spanish people, etc. they all tend to cluster together and feel alienated with the others."<br/><br/>When laws such as Jim Crow and apartheid and caste are enacted to ensure that that will be the case, Your.<br/><br/>By the way, when did "Spanish people"cease to be "Europeans"?
They are, Ed? Should we start rounding up the descendants of the so-called "displaced persons" of WWII and send them back where their ancestors came from?
Well said!!!
When Donald Trump keeps telling his supporters, to assault protesters, at his rallies, at some point someone will start shooting peaceful marchers, during say a Washington rally against the Climate Change policies of this administration. Or perhaps at a march for Women's rights, or support for Science that brings thousands out into our streets.<br/>Donald Trump is enraged when he sees these crowds, marching against his policies, and I worry what will happen next.<br/>See Episode 3 of the Handmaids Tale...
Then anyone who is not white and Christian and Protestant.
You are mistaken about the heart of this issue. Maslenjak v. United States is about a NATURALIZED CITIZEN of the United States, not an unauthorized immigrant. The question here is can a person who has followed all the requirements to become a citizen and been formally naturalized be stripped of their citizenship based on the revelation that they made ANY false statement during the process of becoming a citizen, even something as minor as failing to disclose the fact that they once exceeded the speed limit or parked illegally. Stripping a citizen of their citizenship is very serious indeed, and comparison to the tactics which led up to the holocaust is not unreasonable.
Thanks for letting me know I've made a difference.  If you can't see the danger of normalizing Trump, all the worse for you.  
You know it is not only Mexicans who are subject to our immigration policy. 
He already did that when he ignored Angela Merkel's offer to shake hands.  He squatted on a chair, didn't recognize her, and remained his own special boorish self.  He thinks he should stop paying for NATO?  Is that because his buddy Putin wants to take over the Baltic States?  Where are those tax records showing all the loans he received from Russian oligarchs in London?  They were washed through The Bank of Cyprus and Deutsche Bank.  The recent gift of 95 million was a fake pass of money for property not worth that much.  Trump is constantly near bankruptcy; he is always bailed out by a Russian crook with money stolen from the Russian treasury.  Now, Trump and his family can steal our money directly, despite the Emoluments Clause.
Thank you. Unfortunately auto-correct affects spelling when it is least expected and thwarts our best intentions.
Or, the US could have cooperated with Mexico to build decent refugee housing near the southern Mexico border with services, schools, add manufacturing or service job training.  A significant reason for people fleeing violence in Central America and parts of Mexico is violence.<br/><br/>Similar approach could have been done to help Syrians &amp; Iraqis fleeing Assad &amp; ISIS - really decent housing, utilities, schools, job training.  Located in Turkey, Safe parts of Iraq, Jordan, etc.  What ever it cost it would have been cheap at three times the cost and kept them close to their homes.<br/><br/>Obama and EU were beyond stupid in dealing with the refugee issue.
Mexico has closed its borders; Mexico directs migrants to the Texas border.  Mexico has a corrupt, violent police force which preys on poor, vulnerable migrants.
First:  Jordan has already taken in more refugees than it can accommodate.<br/>Second:  Turkey is an oppressive religious theocracy, at odds with the Syrian refugees.  Turkey has closed its borders to Syrians.<br/>Third:  Iraq is a fractured country: Sunnis in Central Iraq; Kurds up North; Shia aligned with Iran in the South.  The Sunnis are fighting for their political life against the dominant Shia government.  They can't take in Syrian Sunnis.<br/>Fourth:  A safe zone in Syria is sensible, if we had an occupying army to stay there and keep it safe.  We don't; we have a high tech military; occupying armies went out with WWII, and later Korea.  We do have some troops in So, Korea, but if they are at risk, my guess is they will be pulled out.<br/>We have a bloated, expensive unaudited Pentagon.  We have purchased F35's unwanted by the Marines and the Army.  They are not as good as the old F18's.<br/>We are not a major manufacturing country at this time; we do not have a large in flow of money earned in the rust belt.  We have outsourced jobs to China.  We have allowed corporations to take their profits off shore; they are now trying for a one-off where they can bring their money home at 28% or even 15%, not the corporate rate of 33%.  They have not guaranteed to provide jobs for that tax largesse.  If you think GE or GM is going to pay their  share of taxes, I have a bridge for you.  They will use our marketing venues, and our airports and roads, sans a fair tax for that use.
...and what exactly happens to the employers without whom there wouldn't be an undocumented worker problem?<br/>I mean if we throw a few hundred employers in jail for five years for hiring undocumented the lure vanishes overnight.<br/>But we all know Wal-Mart, Target, Home Depot etc. wouldn't survive without hiring undocumented workers and of they say jump rghtst politicans say how high?<br/><br/>This is why rights are such pathetic jokes.<br/>All they do is whine without offering solutions.
I am curious.  In our country we have something called the "statute of limitations" (both federal and state) which limit the timeframe in which someone can be charged with any but a few very clear crimes (e.g. murder).  Someone who commits a violent rape or assault can only be charged during the period covered by the statute of limitations (3-7 years, generally, depending on the state).  Yet under our immigration law, someone whose only "crime" was coming into this country without authorization, creates a solid life for him/herself, has a family, starts a business, pays taxes etc, can be deported at any time, even 20 years after arriving her, despite having never committed "another" crime.  Does that make any sense?  If it does to you, then I question your ethics, your  morality, your compassion.......
The illegal immigrant doesn't have a right to be in my country in the first place. The default penalty for illegal residence is deportation to country of origin.<br/>Please explain how sending illegal immigrants home will cause American citizens to lose rights. 
"...doesn't have a right to be in my country..."  That's kind of what the white man said to the native Americans as they marched them of their ancestral lands to reservations, starved them, gave them pox infected blankets and generally acted out the evil that humans frequently stoop to. <br/><br/>Trump, Sessions, Miller, Bannon and so many others are acting on evil instincts while wrapping themselves in the flag using the law as a spear against their hapless victims.  If the law serves evil actions rather than as a shield against injustice what kind of a nation do you think we will become? 
"It is beyond offensive to analogize the rounding up and murder of Jews in Nazi Germany with an effort to deport people who have no legal right to be here -- people who violate the law by their continued presence in this country"<br/><br/>It would be, but this editorial does nothing of the sort.<br/><br/>Before the Nazis rounded up Jews to exterminate them, it rounded them up under the pretext of "getting rid of all Jews with criminal records."<br/><br/>In the case of Ilse Stanley's husband, the crime in question was a parking violation.<br/><br/>It is not offensive to find similarities between the behavior of the Nazis in the early stages of their consolidation of power with the behavior of the Trump administration.
But you need to look at the history. It was the progressives who wanted eugenics.  Oliver Wendall Holmes wrote the majority opinion that "three generations of imbeciles is enough."  Margaret Sanger was a strong proponent.<br/>I love it how progressives, once they realize how bad their policies were, try to say it was the conservatives. Woodrow Wilson was progressive. How did that work out for African Americans?
Unfortunately, if you've been reading the paper, this is not a thing of the past, even in this country. The European Court just ruled that France and other countries could not force transgender people to submit to forced sterilization in order to legally change their status to their preferred gender. The same articles pointed out that this same law is valid in some States in the country.We are already on the slippery slope. Sad.
Customs and lifestyles change, even within a single generation. Do you want to go back to the mandatory laws of the Puritans of what you can wear based on your status and be forced to attend a certain church and if you dare snooze during the sermon, be hit on the head by a deacon? That was the custom in this country at one point. And this good Puritans weren't even here legally to begin with! But the customs and lifestyles we have today are based on 300 years of absorbing the cultures of various groups that came to this country and made it their own. Thankfully for my immigrant ancestors, they didn't have the immigration laws of today, or I might not be here. And even with those laws that they did have, I'm sure my great-grandmother came in under another name to join her injured husband who was here legally. Does that mean that all of my family should be sent back to Poland? As another person commented, most everything but murder has a statute of limitations, most no longer than 20 years. If our politicians were reasonable, since they have enabled and encouraged illegal immigration for at least that long, they would pass a means for those here with established lives that are not current lawbreakers to become legal, without having to leave the country for 10 years! But they won't, because they are too craven and hard-hearted. 
That is pretty much what happened to native Americans.  For example, The Trail of Tears.  Or Wounded Knee.
You can not possibly have read the article and ask that question.<br/>DIVNA MASLENJAK is from Eastern Europe.  She is Serbian from what is now Bosnia. By American standards and most European ones she is "White".  The entire Supreme Court Case is about whether a white "refugee" can have citizenship removed for having lied during the naturalization process.
@Justin: "it's not fair to entirely blame the Trump administration"<br/><br/>"Trump’s executive orders vastly expand the criminal category".<br/>Who do you blame for that?
You hit on the edges of a pervasive mentality in the US. Law enforcement as a means to fixing our ills. Be it broken windows policing, profiling in minority communities, up-arming local PDs with military equipment, or this misdirected attacks on immigrants by the Trump Admin to satiate his base...there is too much emphasis on law enforcement to fix problems that have deeper causes, and need more complex fixes. (Poverty, lack of education opportunities, etc.)<br/><br/>Law enforcement is not a societal problem solver. 
Progressives commit the same error on immigration -- because they consider the immigration laws immoral they can't understand why anybody would want to enforce them at all, let alone enforce them to their full extent.
It just so happens that the naturalization application asks "Have you EVER committed ... a crime or offense for which you were NOT arrested." Emphasis theirs. Roberts even looked up the Black's Law Dictionary definition of an offense. Speeding qualifies as an offense.
Justin<br/><br/>So what is an "offense for which you were NOT arrested"?<br/><br/>A parking ticket?  Jaywalking?  Spitting on the sidewalk?<br/><br/>What you are suggesting is that the act that would be used to deny a person citizenship is answering the question incorrectly (even if there was no witness to the offense).<br/><br/>Jaywalk.  Never write that down.  You just lied on your form.  You lose your citizenship?  That is nuts.
Justin: "the naturalization application"<br/><br/>For the record, that is USCIS Form N-400, Application for Naturalization:<br/><a href="https://www.uscis.gov/n-400" title="https://www.uscis.gov/n-400" target="_blank">https://www.uscis.gov/n-400</a><br/>(The complete question is in Part 12, line 22.)
The answer, in that case, is to change the laws, not break them. I do not claim that the laws in place are fair and just; in immigration and in many other areas as well. BUT, that does not mean that people should just ignore them. I have no doubt that Al Capone thought the laws against him selling booze, and those restricting his methods of dealing with the competition, were unjust.  Did that justify his ignoring them?
Let's not encourage more lawbreaking. If you are so passionate, why not sponsor a visa or two on your own?
I am a naturalized citizen. The question was very clear. Paraphrasing as I don't recall the exact words:  have you committed a crime for which you were convicted other than traffic violation? <br/><br/>Justice Kennedy is right.
You should be more scared by the actual tactics of this administration!<br/><br/>If you do think that the past 100 days do NOT warrant strong, blunt, and critical opinion pieces, then you are living in a fantasy!  The columns are not scare tactics, the Trump policies are!  And, worse!
She will be.  The moment Trump gets tired of her, as he does of all his women.<br/>That's probably the reason he is driving this.  It would be his cheapest divorce ever.  
"You all should check the immigration law. Title 8 provides for the deportation of people that haven't committed crimes. Title 8 has been the law for decades."<br/><br/>It has also been the law that it is illegal to employ undocumented workers. It has been the law for decades. It was the law when Donald Trump employed undocumented workers on his job site in 1980.
If you examine the facts of the case in Maslenjak v. United States, you will see that the women was well aware of the facts, but chose to lie on her application. That is a different situation, when one makes an honest mistake based on someone else's lie. Your father's citizenship would have been in question due to his lie, yours would not because you were working under false pretenses.
I hope you are right.
I silently cheered when I first read of Chief Justice Roberts' comments at the oral argument. However, I am holding my breath until I see how he votes. 
He'll soon be calling them "so-called" Justices.
John, as an 'habitual criminal,' I appreciate your values and comments.  The label has been burned / branded into me since the 60's; thus my path has been and remains outside looking in.  How long?  Life long: from 23 to 74 ... the result if an artificial construct.  Ironically, I know one when I see one ... and over time I've observed countless persons and behaviors of true 'criminal intent.'  <br/><br/>Five years in the Louisiana State Penitentiary was, in truth, a game changer.  But the heart of the matter are felony convictions, handed out as if they are toy trucks from inside a cereal box.  Seven plus percent of the American population are adjudicated felons, roughly equivalent to the population of the State of New York, man, woman and child.  "Criminals," one and all.  We are the most criminalized nation in the world ... while so many of the most insidious violators of public well being sit in judgement and control over community well being.  Am I making reference to Trump and his goons?  Of course.
We are all human beings and some of us respect the law. Most comments prove how much we are living in a time where relativism rules. I don't understand why so many are more preoccupied with defending illegal aliens then poor Americans. Fellow citizens that fight for their survival. <br/><br/>I have been coming to the US for close to 10 years. I could have chosen to stay illegally. I chose not to. I will follow legal channels eventually.<br/><br/>When you argue some laws are unfair, and nobody should be labeled criminal for not respecting laws, it's no wonder some people are afraid for the future of the country.<br/><br/>Instead of criticizing a president that was democratically elected, get to work to improve the life of your fellow legal citizens.
America doesn't punish unauthorized immigrants, even though the penalty for entering the country illegally or working in the United States without authorization includes fines and/or incarceration. It merely requires them to stop violating immigration laws and return to their home countries.  For example, about 17.5 million Mexicans visit the United States each year and nearly all voluntarily return home. Mexican nationals arrested and deported for entering the country illegally or residing unlawfully in the United States make up a tiny percent of Mexicans returning from the United States to Mexico each year. 
Some will be released in the short run, others not. The vast majority ultimately will be deported. A few will qualify for more-or-less extraordinary types of relief. 
With our new "for Profit" prison system, most probably remain in jail!
This article discusses not just people without documentation but legal residents and naturalized citizens being arrested and deported and/or having their citizenship revoked for minor crimes (traffic tickets, etc).  It is much more frightening than simply having people without documentation deported.
Right, and a hit and run driver, as opposed to a driver, is just words too?<br/> I think not.<br/>We have to take the behaviors of individuals who have deliberately cheated, or didn't even ask permission for entrance here.<br/> Immigrants on track to be citizens, are accommodated considerably and can have the rights they are entitled to, if an honest mistake in paperwork is made.<br/>  However, this nation suffered major attacks on our soil, there are international criminal gangs proliferating here, as well as individuals who's needs, whereabouts and intentions are unknown. We ARE a nation of laws, not just immigrants.<br/> There is a moral and ethical difference between drivers, and hit and run drivers.<br/>  We still have national security to consider, as well as the means and resources to accommodate immigrants who must assimilate eventually and should be compelled to.<br/> The world is MUCH too small to allow millions of people here, to behave as if laws don't matter, and we are oppressing immigrants simply by having a border and a structure in which they are required to ask permission and we know who is who, how many and for how long and their activity and skills.<br/>    We're all speaking in 'just words', but each of them has the weight some people just don't care to acknowledge.<br/>Even hit and run drivers must be held accountable.
You know, one of the worst things about the Trump administration is it's palpable lack of compassion. I agree with tightening up the enforcement of our current immigration laws, but for God's sake why disposess those that have already made a life here, unless they have committed egregious crimes? Compassion and, yes, decorum would go along way towards healing our country.
We should still enforce our laws and deport them. This is not their nation. 
"... Melania Trump ...worked as a model without a work visa -- something the Trump campaign/Administration promised long ago to clear up with additional documentation, but has not."<br/><br/>Sadly, this in time will make Melania a target for criticism, which she does not deserve. Her husband COULD find ways to make this a learning opportunity for the nation, and lead Congress to constructive immigration reform that would carry credibility with the Right. But he shows no such inclination. That would take guts; more guts than building himself up by working up his crowds against a weaker group of people.
She promised to show us her "papers."  Oh wait, they're with Trump's tax returns.  Never mind.
Trump would no doubt pardon her as long as she did everything he wanted!
Why do people keep saying that we didn't watch the border all these years.  Yes we did.  However, we didn't want to pay the type of taxes that would have been required for a near complete shut down.  You get what you pay for.
It just makes sense to enforce the law if it means that fewer people are out of work and receiving government benefits and paying taxes properly on their wages. 
No - it is worse than that. Not just those on green cards, who are permanent residents, but citizens of other nations (with no right to vote here). But United States Citizens who happen to have held citizenship elsewhere at some time in the past. This means anyone who wasn't born here is subject to loss of citizenship.
"...That means anyone here legally on a green card is subject to DOJ's interpretation of the law and possible deportation...."<br/><br/>No surprise. We saw it coming. Most immigration lawyers I know advised their legal resident clients not to travel outside the US once Trump started with the immigration-related orders, whether they were from Muslim countries or not. 
This is why liberals lose. The contempt for anyone who does not agree with them. How do you function knowing there are Trump voters out there? 
For moderate thinkers, along the spectrum of speeding tickets to tax evasion, reasonable is probably closer to Emoluments Clause.
I don't understand your question.  Generally courts are the final arbiters of crime.  They don't tend to see immaterial misstatements of facts as crimes.
Trump was born here so his citizenship cannot be revoked regardless of what his father may have done.  Melania is a naturalized citizen so technically she could be denaturalized.  I wonder if Trump would fight on her behalf if she were to become a test case or if he would see it as an opportunity to rejoin the dating world.
I thought Trump decided not to pursue the Dreamers?
Comparing sending Mexicans home to Mexico with the freeing of slaves is preposterous. Just because you drag a child here does not mean you and the child get the right to break our immigration laws. Our immigration laws are for our benefit, not the benefit of Latinos with large families under the delusion they are entitled to dictate our laws. 
No .. the point is that the government is claiming that *naturalized US citizens* are deportable for minor offenses (such as speeding) that were not prosecuted, or even detected, and not acknowledged in immigration proceedings. This would probably cover most of the non-US born citizens in the US today. 
I'm sure your fellow Californians who own farms growing crops or boarding horses will be thrilled when all their Mexican and other Hispanic workers are gone!
You are apparently perfectly comfortable making the argument that employers should be able to hire illegal workers? That is what you are saying, since only illegal workers are at risk from any Trump/Sessions actions.
You mean those processes where everyone who does not agree with liberal open borders policies is immediately called all kinds of names? 
It would be helpful for you and some of those who responded to you to read an article on this subject that appeared on the pages of the NYT a few years ago:<br/><br/><a href="https://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2011/08/17/could-farms-survive-without-illegal-labor/the-costs-and-benefits-of-a-raise-for-field-workers" title="https://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2011/08/17/could-farms-survive-without-illegal-labor/the-costs-and-benefits-of-a-raise-for-field-workers" target="_blank">https://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2011/08/17/could-farms-survive-wit...</a><br/><br/>Doesn't anyone have a problem with the ag sector essentially saying "we must have illegal workers to survive"?<br/><br/>Ag is the gateway drug of illegal "immigration". Farmers employ illegal workers who, over time, fan out to take jobs Americans most certainly will do. They are then backfilled by additional illegal workers. Following the misbegotten Reagan Amnesty of 1986, half the farmworkers bolted the fields. You see they work at jobs "Americans won't do" because they are illegal, not because they are Hispanic. Legalize them and they are gone. The problem has always been and continues to be that working conditions and pay in farm fields is too low to attract and retain a legal workforce.
When Georgia got rid of its illegal immigrant workers, the crops rotted in the fields.  Georgia backed off, too late.  I grew up in the Central Valley of CA; Mexicans did stoop labor in fields under hot sun; they also picked fruit in orchards, again in the summer heat.  As I recall, there were no "white" field workers, even though we had a large contingent of dust bowl people.  They left to work in the ship yards in So Cal.  The Mexicans sent money home; and most returned home after the season.  The Mexicans I grew up with were born in CA, as were their parents and grandparents.  We went to school together; one of my still best friends is a Mexican woman I grew up with.  Her family gathered the money to send her to college; she met and married the engineer who developed Intel.  She now sends her grandchildren, nieces and nephews to college.  Those are the Mexicans I grew up with; they have a strong family culture; they are good, decent, hard working people.  Those who are coming now are looking for jobs, since we destroyed their farming economy, dependent on corn.  Remember the ethanol scam?  We dumped the excess corn on Mexico.  Now we are dumping it on West Africa, destroying their farming economies.  Mexican construction workers are not destroying the building industry; developers destroyed the home building economy.  Bankers who gave mortgages to the unemployed to buy homes in those developments destroyed the economy.  Failed mortgages rolled across the country.
They're not undocumented. They are illegals. Only a handful work in agriculture. I'd rather pay a higher price for fruit and vegetables and then save money on ESL services and interpreters as well as having that money spent in the community rather than get exported abroad. 
Well, I support the notion that even if his citizenship can't be revoked (as far as I know, he was born here), Flynn should go to jail for his crimes - a fitting and appropriately ironic result for someone who encouraged the "Lock her up" chant of rabid Trump supporters, despite the fact that no criminal wrongdoing by Hillary was ever found, nor is there any evidence that her so-called "personal" email server was ever hacked (as I understand it, the Russians hacked the Democratic party server, a different server altogether).<br/><br/>As for Trump, the child of an immigrant mother and the husband of an immigrant who worked illegally prior to obtaining a work visa, the more pressing problem is that if he's impeached, imprisoned, or deported, we'd then have Pence as president: a man who identifies as "a Christian, a conservative, and a Republican, in that order", and clearly a man who wants to impose a theocracy on the US.<br/><br/>I'm no Trump fan, but I sometimes wonder whether he or Pence is the more frightening. <br/><br/>As for Melania, I'd say that under this administration's rules there's a clear case for revoking her citizenship unless she admitted her work violation on her citizenship papers. Cruel, but hey...tough luck, right? I'm sure she'll do well back in Slovenia...and by the way, how is it that her parents also seem to be living here?
You should take note of which states have made the use of eVerify mandatory. Note also the states that have actively fought making it mandatory. The states requiring it are Republican. The states fighting it are run by Democrats.<br/><br/><a href="http://www.lawlogix.com/e-verify-map/" title="http://www.lawlogix.com/e-verify-map/" target="_blank">http://www.lawlogix.com/e-verify-map/</a>
And it's to many people's advantage to have low-wage workers.  They lower the price of food, nursing care, property maintenance.  Our economy runs on people who accept sub-standard working conditions.  Why are these jobs good enough for Mexicans and other immigrants, but not good enough for Americans?  Racism is woven into the fabric of our economy.  Legalize undocumented workers, yes.  But don't do it because we need those cheap gardeners and dishwashers.  Do it because we don't want cheap labor anymore.
The economic benefit to having illegals here only accrues to a small minority. Meanwhile, the rest of us are forced to pay the real cost of their labor. Should we refuse, we are called xenophobes and bigots. 
If the laws were realistic, they'd be followed. If the laws were not racist, they could stand. If the laws reflected American values, we would not be having this conversation.
And what do you call the stream of low-skilled and poorly educated American citizens (many more than the 11 million illegal immigrants)? Unfortunately, too many of them are called Trump voters and backers!
Most states have a (very good) law: adverse possession otherwise known as squatters rights.  This says, roughly, that if you use someone else's land long enough it becomes yours.  It prevents the revival of ancient claims which would disturb what has been understood for a long time to be a right.  However, looked at literally, using another's land as your own is theft, a fairly serious crime.  <br/><br/>We should treat the rights of people who have lived in this country for a long time  at least as generously as we treat rights to property.
Keep in mind that estimates are half of the illegal immigrants are people who came legally and overstayed their visas.<br/><br/>INS/CBP never have and still do not ever track and confirm that those with temporary, even tourist, visas leave.  <br/><br/>Maybe that would be a good place to start and ban importing cheap labor to displace American citizens while they are at it.   You do know that it is legal to do that - right?
What rot. The only justification I see here is your own. Illegals broke our laws. If they have kids or family members here, that still does not give them a free pass to continue breaking our laws. If their family members do not wish to join them in a new country that's their problem not ours. Allowing millions of Latinos here does not constitute diversity.  <br/><br/>We didn't create this problem. They did. They have no cause to tell us how to run our nation or how to respond to their violations of our laws. 
Illegal immoral immigration by Native American conquering Europeans along with their guns, Bibles and enslaved African property was nature of the birth of the American nation.<br/><br/>What is spurious and hypocritical is the inhumane immoral  myth that America is a 'land of the free and home of the brave' worthy of the blessing of any just God.<br/><br/>What goes with humane is empathy and curiosity. Being 'smart' is what brought us to the center of this conundrum crossroad conflict.
You missed a large section of the article that does, in fact, discuss illegal "immigrants" and what constitutes a sufficiently criminal offense to pop one to the top of the deportation list.<br/><br/>"While President Barack Obama set deportation priorities by making a distinction between undocumented immigrants with serious criminal convictions and everyone else, Trump’s executive orders vastly expand the criminal category — so much so that it essentially criminalizes anyone in the country who is without status and makes the roughly 11 million undocumented immigrants in the United States a top priority for deportation. Between January and March of this year, Immigration and Customs Enforcement arrested 21,362 immigrants, a 32.6 percent increase from the same period last year. Of those arrested, 5,441 of them had no history of violating a law."
Agreed. Mr. Stanley is simply not being honest. He must know that for many years the Republican assumption has been that if you're here without the proper paperwork (visa, green card, etc.) then you are committing a criminal act. The logic of this assumption is unassailable; it's the law of the land. His argument is bound to lose and if the Democrats choose to take this tack they'll just be squandering whatever credibility they have left.<br/>Also, when Trump and friends use the phrase "criminal alien" they mean "illegal alien".<br/>My fellow liberals have to stop being so thick if they ever want to win another election.<br/>Me? For the first time in my long life I'm no longer a registered Democrat. It was just too humiliating.
Louisa, you are conflating two issues:<br/>1) U.S. immigration policy<br/>2) Criminalization of the "other"<br/><br/>Yes, the Democrats can (and should) support immigration reform.We can start by making e-Verify mandatory, and enforcing existing laws against employers who hire illegal immigrants. There is enough hypocrisy to go around for both political parties on this issue.<br/><br/>But what we (as Democrats) must stand strong on is making this about the rule of law, and not denigrating the "other". Mr. Trump's entire appeal is based on blaming the Mexicans and Muslims for all our problems. They took our jobs. They are rapists, drug dealers, and terrorists. We need to build a wall (that Mexico will pay for, believe me).<br/><br/>Many illegal immigrants are visa overstays. And many of them are Irish, Brits, and white Europeans.<br/><br/>By contrast, the danger (that Democrats should never forget, and Mr. Stanley rightly points out), is that Mr. Trump is scapegoating specific ethnic groups. And he is attempting to use any quasi-legal excuse (a traffic ticket) to deport only these specific brown people.<br/><br/>Mr. Stanley is right. Don't normalize Mr. Trump. And don't fall into the trap that well-meaning German citizens did in the 1930s. This is how it starts.<br/><br/>It could happen here. And the fact that self-professed liberals are falling in line scares me immensely.
rebuplicans have been arguing for years that anyone who is living and working in the US without  a work visa is a criminal by definition because they have broken the law that requires non-citizens to have a work visa. Perhaps some actually think that all infractions are equal or that small infractions inevitably lead to larger ones, but it looks more like fear mongering in order to deport larger numbers of generally hard working and law-abiding non-citizens.
He has a good case there.
ariel,<br/><br/>Sending Mexicans home to Mexico is not a crime. 
It is for each individual human being to change this within themselves, and to transcend what you seem to consider as a societal norm of "blaming others". Overcoming this tendency is not by any means the highest level of one's ethical development.
Sory, but I completely reject the concept that our government should protect us from ourselves, and the "baser instincts" of others.  As defined in the constitution, the government has a role in protecting individual liberties, and thus can control the behavior of others--but only as that behavior impacts my freedoms, not my feelings.<br/><br/>Communities have and do construct mores that include prohibitions on baser behavior (and even thoughts), and historically have imposed exile on those suspected of non-compliance.  But again, the US legal and historical legacy puts individual beliefs and preferences above the group (or mob).  And while the system has failed in the past, including the notable examples you list, we could have avoided those by holding true to individual liberties--for all, and not appealing to slippery concepts of noble thinking.
Wow. And San Diego is in liberal California. Who would be administering this? Californians? 
There is no selective prosecution, Larry.  That's the racially prejudiced narrative put forth by groups like Black Lives Matter and no-talent hacks like Ava Duvernay (of the slanderous "13th").
Sessions believes that the separation of Church and State is illegal. 
Notice also that ICE is now basically a paramilitary organization that answers to no-one and can arrest citizens and non-citizens alike, lock them in detention with no ability to contact lawyers, and hold them indefinitely without specific cause. 
With all due respect, James, you are not addressing the key point of the article. The Supreme Court case that was argued last week had nothing at all to do with "illegal aliens." Instead, it dealt with a naturalized citizen and the grounds on which the U.S. Government is allowed to revoke that citizenship. Most naturalized citizens have never been out of legal status. The government is now arguing that it has the right to revoke citizenship on virtually any basis, including having driven over the speed limit in the past, or failing to provide an embarrassing nickname on a naturalization application. That, coupled with the increasing dehumanization of immigrants, has nothing whatsoever to do with your arguments, and everything to do with why so many Americans are alarmed and frightened.
The US does not owe any foreigner economic opportunity. The US also does not owe anyone the right to stay here if they are in violation of our immigration laws in any way. 
Any white person who is a descendent of those who came before immigration was limited and new arrivals had to go through places like Ellis Island, could be considered illegal because their ancestor(s) came without "right or authorization."  How many people are sending their DNA off to <a href="http://Ancestry.com" title="Ancestry.com" target="_blank">Ancestry.com</a> or 23 and Me because they want to "trace their roots?"  Who really has "roots" here?
Your comment is the perfect answer to commenter James Bowen above you. The government--dem and GOP-- aided and abetted by big business, allowed illegal immigration to be come normal-- the statutes against it were "left long in abeyance." That is why we cannot deport 11 million people en masse, just because a new regime has criminalized what was so recently acceptable. This is why people like me-- a california liberal who is in favor of strong borders-- finds all this hate speech and activity so distasteful. Thanks for bringing clarity. 
The point of the article is that Mr. Trump is arbitrary in who designates as criminals and who he doesn't. The white man who just shot up a pool party....can we now say all white males with a grudge are criminals? In need of deportation? What if Mr. Trump decides to take away the pensions of all ex-Marines and soldiers? Not possible, you say? Are you sure? If he does, who will you complain to? If you complain, what if he decides all complainers are "losers" and "criminals"?<br/>Being a leader means more than throwing your weight around.
Now if only Trump's mere presence as president would work in preventing Americans from shooting and killing other Americans...
So unless we let all the world's unskilled foreigners move here, no one will want to move here? Really? 
The article is not simply about deportation... it's about the slippery slope of revoking citizenship for trivial mishaps. That's unprecedented and also ominous of more violations of constitutional rights.. 
There is a much cheaper, easier, and more effective way to address illegal immigration:<br/><br/>- Make e-Verify mandatory<br/>- Prosecute existing federal law against employers who hire illegal immigrants.<br/><br/>No wall needed. And then the "hard working members" of ICE can focus on the handful of people who cross the border illegally to commit crimes, rather than to earn a living.
actually illegal immigrants pay taxes, and usually receive few benefits from them.And actually, illegal immigrants are less likely to commit violent crimes than people who live here. When the ICE starts rounding up illegals from canada, europe, etc.. in other words white people, you will have a better argument.
The vast majority of undocumented workers have taxes withheld by their employers leading to billions in unclaimed refunds and benefits. They are not evading taxes.
Margaret, <br/><br/>The vast majority of illegals qualify for the EITC and are not a net economic benefit for most of us. Those who are working are violating additional laws and should be heavily fined and prosecuted along with their employers. 
No, but the government was not trying to make the case that this was an egregious violation: it was trying to make the absurd case that any issue whatsoever with one's naturalization paperwork could be used to lead to loss of citizenship. <br/><br/>In other words: it's the overreaching nature of the argument that was made that, appropriately, triggered Justice Roberts' response. Had the government made an argument around the seriousness of the issues hidden, the discussion would have gone in a completely different direction.
The prosecutor could have made his case around the egregiousness of the crime, but chose instead to state that *any* crime is sufficient to warrant deportation. That is what Jason Stanley has written about. 
Are you seriously classifying Justice Roberts as "left wing?"
What you have said is probably true. But the USA has never abided by that right.<br/>Consider the occupation of the Mexican state of what became known as Texas - when the settlers decided they would not abide by the laws of Mexico, they declared themselves as independent and were subsequently annexed by the USA.<br/>Or consider the spurious reasons for the USA invasion of Mexico and the eventual land grab of three quarters of Mexico. We now declare Mexicans crossing our southern borders as criminals.
Based on family origin that would be to Germany or Scotland and I don't think they want him there! How about Paraguay with all the prior nazi sympathizers? 
Trump used Poles to build his Tower; when they demanded to paid what their contracts stated, his response was "sue me".  They had to accept what he offered.  Now, he has imported poor Romanians to work at Mar a Lago; he will pay them little, or nothing.  If they demand to be paid, his response will be "sue me".  He refused to hire any Mexicans who would have sued him for unpaid wages.  His bogus Trump U degrees cost $35,000; he has now settled a class action suit for $3500 each.  He is a grifter; he is a tax cheat; he is an adulterer and an exploiter.  He is now the "leader of the free world" due to an Electoral College win in gerrymandered State voting districts.  He lost the popular vote.
What country would take him?
autocorrected into incorrect...<br/>I meant to type:<br/>They're not merely "undocumented," as if they just FORGOT to do some silly paperwork; they're here illegally.
Illegal "immigrants" are not immigrants any more than a burglar is a house guest.
The constant assertion that enforcing our immigration laws makes us Nazis is why it is impossible to take liberals seriously on this issue. Sending Mexicans home does not make us modern day Hitlers. 
Amen and Amen to what you say, ACJ!
Principled courage from this majority Republican congress? From the beneficiaries of Fox News, fossil fuel dollars and gerrymandering? Doubtful.
Having a family is not a get out of jail free card. 
Melania Trump is years past the usual expiration date for Donald's women, and he doesn't seem to want her around.<br/><br/>You can bet that he wouldn't be above having her thrown out of the country if it suited him.
This is to say nothing of the illegal workers who also helped/assisted in building Trump Towers in NYC.  Oh yes, I know, Trump has said it was a sub-contractor who hired the illegal workers and paid them a below minimal wage.  How Trump likes to wash his hands of his responsibilities.  It is always someone else's fault.  
@Richard Spencer: malicious gossip is not PROOF.<br/><br/>However, if you can establish that Melania Trump broke the law, and lied on her naturalization papers....then take her court, convict her and deport her.
Sending Mexicans home to Mexico is not a criminal act. 
The US Constitution does not say "no borders" or "all illegal aliens who manage to get here, have a right to stay and steal a job from a US citizen".<br/><br/>You may want such a Constitution. I know your dear Empress Hillary wanted to redo the US Constitution, to be more like the South African Constitution.<br/><br/>But don't expect REAL Americans to take that lying down.
Bankruptcies are not violations of the law; They are uses of the law to avoid<br/>paying debts.<br/>Getting things of value from foreign entities when you are president, that is against the law.<br/>But since Trump is not an illegal alien, he gets a free pass.
Congress has the power to craft naturalization laws. They can come together to stop Trump's executive order. As it stands, all Republican Congresspeople that do not cross the aisle to make a humane naturalization law are responsible for this dehumanizing authoritarian policy. Anyone that voted Red is complicit. 
As a person who came to the country legally and spent years to get citizenship, I see the point of this comment. Sometimes, I feel the same too. <br/><br/>That said, there are certain cases that are very clear. Some not so. <br/><br/>If someone was brought in as an infant illegally, getting them out of the country at age 30 when they have family and roots here -&gt; Not ok.<br/><br/>Someone who just crossed the border -&gt; deport.<br/><br/>Things in between. You need to draw a line. The line would be arbitrary. But saying that there is no line is wrong. <br/><br/>Also, you need to see what is right for the country. Deporting someone who is hardworking is bad for that person. At the same time, it is bad for the country. Cutting off your nose to spite someone else is always a bad policy!<br/><br/>None is allowed to demand rights. At the same time, you also need to realize that offering them rights makes the country better. 
No illegals are entitled to anything but deportation. They don't make our laws. We do. 
The more I learn about politics, the more I find there are more criminals in the upper echelons of government then on our streets, and I live in Detroit.  I read that politicians often  use blackmail and other coercions to force compliance with certain views which are meant to increase their oil wealth.   
 Breaking our immigration laws is not akin to a parking ticket. Humans do not have inherent right to move anywhere they wish. 
@NL452KH: and there are appropriate punishments for parking or speeding -- tickets, fines, court appearances, and if you persist....losing your license or even jail time.<br/><br/>The appropriate punishment for illegal immigration is....being deported back to your native homeland.<br/><br/>To read these comments, and the hysterical, biased Professor Stanley, one would think the US was executing illegal aliens with firing squads and then dumping the corpses in unmarked graves! They are libeling our nation, our President and our entire political system -- because of their sympathy for ILLEGAL CRIMINALS over US citizens.
It was in the past for instance with the Irish....  So as you say, no one is safe...
<a href="https://apps.bostonglobe.com/magazine/graphics/2017/01/immigration/" title="https://apps.bostonglobe.com/magazine/graphics/2017/01/immigration/" target="_blank">https://apps.bostonglobe.com/magazine/graphics/2017/01/immigration/</a><br/><br/>Nope, humans are as ignorant and stupid as they ever were...
You are absolutely wrong.<br/><br/>NONE of these laws specify race, ethnicity or national origin. They say "illegal alien".<br/><br/>You can be here illegally from Canada and Europe and some are. I've read that 50,000 Irish citizens are here illegally.<br/><br/>I absolutely, unequivocally call to deport them.<br/><br/>The only problem is....all those Canadians and Europeans amount to about 2% of all illegals. While 72% come from just one place -- Mexico.<br/><br/>That's way it looks like "it's about Mexicans". Well, Mexicans have been the primary border violators and turned this from a minor problem into a giant, 25 million person mess. But they are all going -- I promise you.<br/><br/>God Bless Our President Trump!
No one is proposing anything of the sort. Sending illegals home because they break our laws is what is being enacted and it is the right thing to do. 
@carol: that is paranoid hysteria.<br/><br/>NOBODY can deport a legal citizen -- NOBODY -- not the President -- not Congress -- NOBODY.<br/><br/>Once you ARE a citizen, they can send you to jail -- in some states, execute you for your crime -- but they cannot deport you.<br/><br/>To say what you did -- that 3rd generation citizens could be "rounded up in a crackdown" -- is a brazen, partisan LIE.<br/><br/>Furthermore....where on earth would they send you? a third generation American citizen?<br/><br/>When has this EVER been done? can you show on single example?
In all fairness that is somewhat recent.  My mother a Holocaust survivor who went underground and worked in a network with Raoul Wallenberg in Hungary and that saved other people.  She noticed that when the chips are down there is no telling which way any individual will go.
Importing poor people here is only making life miserable for many Americans while failing to hold Latino leaders responsible for their actions and their own failure to act on behalf of their own people. 
@Ray Orr: and LIBERALS are the ones who laugh at the pain of the working class in America -- the CITIZENS -- like  your Empress Hillary who told us we were all "deplorables in a basket" and unworthy of jobs, respect, fair treatment, etc.<br/><br/>I read these forums daily. I read thousands of comments (mostly from liberals, as this is the NYT) and I know how liberals in America think, feel and speak.<br/><br/>I know you hate us, and we have voted accordingly.
The employer is not allowed to ask about where the potential employee comes from (or if they're married, etc). If the employee has papers that the government accepts that is all the employer is allowed to do. Remember e-verify? Who objected most to that? The ACLU. How many people have had their SS numbers stolen by illegal aliens? I have absolutely no problem with immigrants, I have friends who came here legally. It was tough for them, but they did it the right way.
Chris, <br/><br/>No one has the inherent right to demand we let them in here so they can make more money. The answer to world poverty is not importing all poor people here. 
@Garak: the cause is....both political parties.<br/><br/>The Republicans want cheap labor for business, so they don't have to pay even the current, cruddy $7.25 minimum wage, but can hire frightened illegals who will accept any wages, and do dangerous work without proper safety guards.<br/><br/>The Democrats want "all the brown skinned peoples of the world", to make this nation minority-majority -- and then, with the automatic votes of the new immigrants, they will have total political power for generations, essentially a "one party system" (see: California) where they can pass all the lefty social engineering of their dreams.<br/><br/>BTW: Rich Democrats also want a servant class, so they can go to their high &amp; mighty jobs, and work long hours, while Marie or Jose clean the house, babysit the kids, landscape the yard, clean the pool, etc. -- you can't really have that swell upper class lifestyle without SERVANTS. The Dems are no better than the right on this issue -- HYPOCRISY.<br/><br/>The suffering Americans are those caught in the middle -- shoved out of jobs, wages declining -- unable to compete with workers who will do hard jobs for sub-minimum wages, with no benefits! (Let's see how YOU'd like that in your white collar world!) We are ignored and despised by BOTH parties, as "lower class" and "not wealthy enough to bribe politicians".
Yes, and half the world--3 billion people--would like to come to the United States, and if they all did, it would be anarchy, and the country would be environmentally unsustainable and would crash in very short order. <br/><br/>Here's an analogy. There are undoubtedly some homeless people who would like to live in your house with you. If you're willing to let 15 homeless people move in with you, I'll give you your argument. 
I didn't make an argument for open borders, Dave. I said that philosophically, the conflict is between human rights--what are traditionally called "natural rights"--and civil rights, which are limited to citizens. We're not getting the debate on immigration right because we're not distinguishing between the two. As others have pointed out, the perverse thing about the immigration debate is that it's in the interests of the "haves" who make the law to have cheap labor they can exploit. So the human rights of immigrants who lack the protections of citizenship are trampled in the name of profit.<br/><br/>To me it seems self-evident that if undocumented workers get work, somebody's hiring them because their labor is useful. These employers just don't want to pay citizens enough to make these often difficult jobs attractive. But it's the people most opposed to undocumented immigrants "stealing our jobs" who are also most likely to vote for politicians who don't support strong labor laws. This makes no sense to me.<br/><br/>Again, I'm not saying we should have open borders, but it seems obvious that we need this labor. So either our immigration quotas for certain countries such as Mexico are too low, or employers need to pay enough to attract citizens.<br/><br/>We need to understand the real conflict between the civilized artificiality of borders and the basic human instinct to migrate to a place where flourishing is possible. We need to think about this differently to arrive at sane immigration policy.
C Wolfe, the point of all the cheap foreign labor is to undercut the wages of American workers. The wages of meat packers, for example, a generation ago were above $20/hour in inflation adjusted dollars. Now they're minimum or close to it, under atrocious conditions. The oversupply of cheap immigrant labor has not only undercut wages, but it has helped emasculate the unions. This is why big biz GOPers have always supported mass immigration (The Tea Partiers, working class and middle class Democrats, and lefties like me who still care about unions, and workers, and others have opposed it). <br/><br/>Numbers from the National Academy of Sciences study last fall show that mass immigration has caused a dramatic redistribution of income--half a trillion dollars annually from low/no-skilled Americans (and immigrants) to the business owners who employ these people.<br/><a href="http://cis.org/NAS-Study-Workers-and-Taxpayers-Lose-Businesses-Benefit" title="http://cis.org/NAS-Study-Workers-and-Taxpayers-Lose-Businesses-Benefit" target="_blank">http://cis.org/NAS-Study-Workers-and-Taxpayers-Lose-Businesses-Benefit</a><br/>A sane immigration policy would look like what the late Barbara Jordan proposed when she ran a commission on immigration reform under Clinton. She recommended halving legal immigration relative to current numbers, and strict enforcement of immigration laws, for the same reasons I'm advocating it.<br/>If you want the US to look like China and India, open the borders. If you want us to look more like, say, Denmark, a sane immigration policy is needed. If you want to talk more, pls contact at comet2cv at yahoo dot com
He also took an oath to defend the constitution, but is in clear violation of the emoluments clause.
Am I misunderstanding?  Trump and his accomplices claim they could revoke someone's US citizenship on the basis of a traffic ticket.  In that case we are not even talking about undocumented people but those who have undergone the highly documented investigation required to be a naturalized citizen.<br/><br/>Jason Stanley insightful and sensitive article links to parallels between the US extreme right (that has taken over the Republican party) and the Nazi regime in Germany that led to WWII.  One thing that comes to mind is the "one drop rule" that was the basis for Jim Crow's regime and was so similar to Nazi laws:  you were a Jew if one of your great grand parents was suspected of having been Jewish.  Doesn't Trump's doubting the impartiality of a judge because of his Mexican ancestry fits in this?<br/><br/>The resilience of racist construction is evidenced by the fact that culturally we still follow the one drop rule in defining someone's   "race".  The result is an existential reality on the people it defined.  The rule makes you black just as the Nazi laws made you a Jew (that's why some Catholic nuns died in Auschwitz).  
Refusing to have open borders is not an injustice. It's impossible to argue with liberals on this issue. ANY laws on immigration short of open borders is a moral evil to them. 
The Daily Telegraph reports youth unemployment as follows:<br/><br/>Greece 45.2%<br/>Spain 41.5%<br/>Italy 35.2%<br/>...<br/>France 23.6%<br/><br/>Go on!  Tell me the "EU" is working!  I like a good joke.<br/><br/>Or are you going to call me a fascist for telling the truth?<br/><br/><a href="http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2017/04/30/black-rule-youth-unemployment-causing-social-unrest-warnsadecco/" title="http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2017/04/30/black-rule-youth-unemployment-causing-social-unrest-warnsadecco/" target="_blank">http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2017/04/30/black-rule-youth-unemploy...</a>
Until the press stops giving the right wing a reward by hyping every Muslim shooting like it was the apocalypse, they will continue to win.<br/><br/>Some drunk white dude shoots up a birthday party in San Diego, all minorities, and it gets no national coverage. A Muslim does the same thing 6,000 miles away and the networks pre-empt their scheduled programming for hours on end. 
"In France, Mr. Macron matched Ms. Le Pen’s strident Euroskepticism and anti-refugee language with an unashamed passion for continental unity and multiculturalism."  Right, continenatal "unity" and "multiculturalism" will get this ex-investment-bankster far--the very one responsible for the bankrupt neoliberal economic policies of Hollande.    "Liberals" like McDonald Gibson continue to miss the point:  namely, millions of people have been immiserated by the EU, ECB, World Bank, IMF, austerity etc.  and they are expressing their frustration by voting _against_ the parties of the status quo.  The French will vote for Macron despite their contempt for him and for what he stands for--and because they cannot stomach (yet) voting for  a crypto-Nazi.  (And because they have a bit more sense than Americna voters.)  At least Hillary wasn't an ex-investment banker, but she still managed to lose.  Le Pen can't win the election, but Macron...could certainly lose it.  And after five years of same old same old, Le Pen will likely be all the stronger.  Melenchon was a much better bet.   It's not the same, but just as Bernie was the much better bet in the U.S.  But the bought Democratic party and bought and paid for media--including the NYT--wouldn't have it.  So you have Trump instead. Good work.    
Like lemmings, the followers of Melenchron are about to commit the same suicidal mistake and elect Marine Le Pen as the followers of Bernie made when they sat out our election and elected Donald Trump.  Melenchron, the Trotskyite candidate of La Gauche, lost in the first round.  And now, his brain-dead supporters declare they will take back all their marbles and go home.  Oh well, as the French say: "Quand on est con, c'est pour la vie."
The Left's immigration policies equal national suicide. "Being open to the world" is just a euphemism; the Third World is flooding into our countries to such an extent that we will become minorities in our own land within decades. That is nothing but genocide against Europeans by the global elite. When the retribution for this historical crime finally comes, the traitors of the Left will wish that they had never been born. 
GOD is talking "Isolationism" of Populism, the destroyer:<br/><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/apr/28/orca-killer-whales-killings-monterey-bay-california" title="https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/apr/28/orca-killer-whales-killings-monterey-bay-california" target="_blank">https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/apr/28/orca-killer-whales-k...</a>
People are tribal and one can be protective of their heritage without embracing hate. Many who the press throw under the Bus with a broad brush simply do not  want to lose their heritage under a swamp of migrants- legal and illegal.
Expelling the migrant/refugee criminals, religiously inspired or not, may be the first step in integrating these people into European society. Citizens of all political persuasions in almost any country in Europe can probably get behind that. It might be romantic to believe an accused migrant is a present day Jean Valjean, but it's doubtful.
Defending borders, language and culture is now "far-right?"<br/><br/>That is why populism hasn't peaked in Europe.  Despite the examples of the "poor immigrant" or "refugee" Ms. McDonald-Gibson, like the one about Greece: -<br/>"And anyone under the illusion that the values of human rights, tolerance and dignity for all — enshrined in European Union treaties — can be taken for granted should visit the camps in Greece where around 62,000 refugees are trapped, many of them in dire conditions.)"<br/><br/>should be vey scared.  Scared because she ignores the strain and cost in money, services and blood that they have brought with them.  Most of them are economic migrants, benefit shopping among the Europeans.  And they fight among each other.  And a number are terrorists.  Let this country-wrecker live in Calais, near the illegal refugee camp and she'll sing a different tune very quickly.  <br/><br/>And NYT, please stop the pro-illegal immigrant Op-Eds and articles.  They are just propaganda at this point.  Language, borders and culture matter to the majority, and the idea that the Western world can absorb the non-Western world, or has any obligation to do so, is wrong.  Except in the eyes of the globalist, open-borders elite like the NYT and this writer.
It is fascinating how well-informed Americans are about all things European, or at least they think they are, judging from this comment section. I wish perception matched reality. What do you guys know about Europe and its problems? How many languages do you speak, how many European newspapers do you read? I know I will be branded as elitist and condescending for saying this, but folks, don't believe everything you hear on Fox news.
Excellent Op-Ed, but the U.S.A. could and should contribute to European unity by ceasing its endless war on Europe:<br/><br/>The extortion racket against European banks and corporations (that have enriched the U.S. Treasury by over $ 100 billion and denied the E.U. an additional $ 1000 billion through Opportunity Cost in lost business with nations ‘unfriendly’ to the U.S.) began with the U.S.’s attempt to seize control of the entire Middle East: Major European banks and corporations have been forced to dismiss their own top managers for having acted in accordance with European and U.N. laws but in contravention of U.S. Law. Not one single European politician has dared to object to the U.S.A.’s unilateral application of its laws to their nations: Merkel, Hollande and the rest are without Principle or Backbone. They are spineless slaves of a foreign power. The horrendous refugee crisis is just one of the many consequences of their cowardice in sheepishly agreeing to bomb Libya and Syria. The sole, willing European ‘enabler’ is the U.K., a U.S. slave by its own admission, that itself risks breaking up as Scotland, Wales and N. Ireland choose E.U. re-integration over U.S. serfdom. The U.K. prefers “shared values with the U.S.” to the protection and strengthening of Europe. Those oft-repeated “shared values” are friendly dictatorships, Wars of Choice, armament exports, the Dollar:Sterling Axis against the Euro, “Safe Haven” status and state-sponsored money-laundering. 
Being one of the citizens living in a member state of the European Union (one of the smallest states), I strongly disagree with the writer in many points. First of all, the writer unnecessarily divides the political field into two extremes: pro EU vs. pro nation state. This should not be the case. EU is a tool, not necessarily mean in itself. Even if one is against Brussels bureaucracy, one can still be pro-democracy and pro-western. Some problems can be resolved in EU level, but many should be kept eniterly in the national level.<br/><br/>Secondly, EU member states do not share language or history. When Mr. Macron speaks passionately about EU, he probably means that France equals EU. For me, as a citizen of a small member state, it sounds more like we all should learn french and do whatever Mr. Macron or whoever French president says.<br/><br/>I am pro-European citizen and against Mrs. Le Pen. But I can very well understand why her message resonates well.
The battle today is traditionally sovereign states vs corporate globalism. The key issue is who has the rights to control economic policy. By creating trade deals and structures such as the European Union the globalist have created a buffer that eliminates the Ability for the average citizen to have any say or vote in economic policy. The result of course is the rich get richer and the rest get the bill.
As long as the EU remains wedded to debt deflation (aka austerity) and neoliberal "structural reforms," right-wing populism is not going away anytime soon. If Germany does not agree to domestic expansion and EU fiscal integration (banking union, Euro bonds), Macron will just be a rerun of the hapless Hollande.<br/><br/>It's welcome that liberal politicians are actively embracing progressive rhetoric, but in the end it's "the economy, stupid!"
I agree with the author that Populism has not peaked.<br/>I think with every new terrorist attack that happens in Europe, populism will see added strength.<br/>There are many many people who dislike the "new normal".  Claiming populism is over is like claiming that terrorism in the EU has peaked also. Which it has not. They are inextricably tied together. 
Dear Char: Until Progressive ideals--integration, tolerance, equality-- are installed and maintained in ALL the countries of the world and not just in western ones, we will continue to have push back from the so-called populists. And the populists are correct: most of the countries whence immigrants and refugees stem from are led by despots and dictators who treat their people horribly. This needs to cease, and the world needs to make it cease. Instead of expecting western countries to pick up the tab for freedom and equality, these other countries need to "progress" into the 21st century by becoming more "western".  
This is to be expected . <br/><br/>We re in the last throws of nationalism, misogyny and racism. The people that have had privilege since the dawn of time are angry that they are fast becoming the minority. <br/><br/>It will take perhaps one more generation to break their bonds, but make no mistake, it is happening. There is nothing they can do about it. <br/><br/>A good thing. 
Immigrants are once more used as a target, but the problem of Europe is the EU. Greece was treated as a colony of Germany during the financial crisis, the French president was summoned to Berlin to explain why the national deficit was above 3%. Even if all muslin immigrants are gone from Europe that will not save Europe. It will still be Greater Germany.<br/>So please stop focusing on the wrong problem.
Complacency should be avoided, but Ms. McDonald-Gibson generalizes too much from Little England. She writes: "But this kind of language was utterly absent from the Remain campaign before the Brexit referendum, where leaders were too embarrassed or fearful to show such emotional support for the European Union and instead tried to make their case using facts and figures." <br/><br/>There's the problem with Little England. Better together might have been OK to keep the Scots, but with the EU, for too many in England it has always been keeping score. England has never been quite sure it wants to be in Europe--especially if it can't control.<br/><br/>The idea of the European Union is about a union better for all.
I have worked in France every summer for last twenty-four years except one and I have never met an ethnic French person who wants an open Continent, if by "open Continent" you mean unrestricted access to it from refugees, terrorists posing as refugees, economic aspirants from Easter Europe or Africa or the Middle East, and the like. In fact, most French are against such a notion. If by "open Continent" you mean a European Union in which Europeans can travel and work without visas, most French don't even want this. They want to preserve France, the French ethnic stock, the French language and culture, and so on. They don't want to be overwhelmed by others any more than others want to be overwhelmed by another group, particularly those who consider French culture inferior out of misguided cultural arrogance that prevents them from assimilating and sees some of the radicalizing to the point of killing and attempt to kill massive numbers of French citizens. This is what they want, and the attempt to denigrate and shame this desire ("dark clouds") for cultural preservation is, thank goodness, becoming more ineffectual by the minute. 
"Europe’s next crucial election will be held in Germany in September." You make me despair, if 8 June is not that crucial election. But it is, where the formerly centre-right Conservative Party in England (in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland politics are different) openly uses far right tactics of inciting hatred, fear and channelling frustration to vote for cuts to immigration and an end even to the international human rights treaties, in favour of "British human rights" for Conservative voters. They relentlessly monster benefits claimants, to make the struggling poor hate those even poorer than they. <br/><br/>Populism here promises nothing, but divides people against each other in the interests of the wealthy elites, using our fear, anger and despair to cement Conservative control, as they eviscerate our public services and regulations for public protection. The illusions here are as bad as those sold to Trump voters. The result is kleptocracy. 
Putin's plan to flood Europe with refugees  seems to be proceeding apace. He had hoped that by stirring up conflict in the middle east  that oil prices could be be increased.  he's getting the first part right. In spades.
The "EU" is about nationalism.<br/><br/>"EU"-fanatics want a "European" nation.  They already have a "parliament", a flag, a national anthemn, a supreme court and "EU"-passports.<br/><br/>Now they want further integration including a "European" army.<br/><br/>And they don't care how many "citizens of Europe"  don't want it.<br/><br/>They are creating a situation which might make it possible for a European Gadaffi, Julius Caesar, Napoleon etc. to grab power and turn the whole thing into a full-blown totalitarian state.<br/><br/>They might be producing a situation which will lead to violent uprisings and wars of independence.<br/><br/>I am so glad that the UK is getting out.<br/><br/>I want a full British all-day Brexit.  And all night too.<br/><br/>I want total independence and the complete restoration of our sovereignty.<br/><br/>Theresa May needs to ensure the food supply.  Austrians have been building massive greenhouses and substantioally reduced the import of tomatoes from Italy and Spain.<br/><br/>In the right greenhouses we could grow everything in East Anglia:  tomatoes, bananas, aubergines, Indian spices etc.<br/><br/>Once we are out we could build a better, sensible relationship with the continentals,which I believe should involve making German the first foreign language in schools  and teaching languages better and teaching other subjects partly through comprehensiion exercises on foreign languages.<br/><br/>What we don't need and what the majority of continentals don't need is the "EU".
That is true, not yet peaked. Brexit is a floating issue, not really born yet. When it does, consequences will be a bright turmoil on cause of Populism. Neither a EU populist candidate was appoint the palace of ruling yet. Wilder failed but gained a little momentum. Le Pen is still on the run, struggling. Not peaked yet. Neither Trump peaked yet, his presidency still in the childhood stage, although definitely showing too much draw backs of a vigorous destructing Populism in a short time.<br/>But populism peaked already in other parts of the world, Russia, Egypt, Turkey, and Philippine, least to say peaked bloodshed.<br/>Who wants Populism after it  is proved experimentally? Only the fool, blind minded.
Europe is suffering from a perfect storm: The failure to have a joint effort to manage the massive influx of refugees and immigrants and the complete failure of the Monetary Union to curb southern Europe's excessive fiscal policy. The EU has become the scapegoat for everybody, when in fact it is the national governments who, while stressing the importance of an European Union, have shown no willingness to allow for an effective and enforceable pan-European policy on both issues. We are stuck in a mess between sovereign states and a federal union. 
Here is another article that talks about the rise of right-wing nationalism, but doesn't mention income inequality.  The root cause of all this discontent is the inability of the average person to earn a living wage.  We didn't have these problems when the average worker could live a good life and send his kids to college.  Neoliberal economic policies that deify the Market and hugely reward a few players, while the rest scrap over the droppings of the ultra rich are to blame.  And this is all getting worse because of automation that is eliminating more and more jobs that the average person can do.  Solve the problem of income inequality and all the other problems will go away.
The attraction of "populist" fringe parties and candidates will start to ebb in the West, when the mainstream parties start to recognize and ameliorate the concerns of the voters that are starting to turn to them in droves.<br/>-There is nothing inherently wrong with loving your country and it's traditional culture; it's called Patriotism<br/>- Immigrants need to assimilate<br/>- Brussels &amp; Washington DC do not know best<br/>- People need good paying jobs not government handouts 
I don't know about populism, but ignorance and anti-intellectualism continues to enjoy a rising popularity. 
Why does the media insist on using "populism" as an euphemism for ultra-nationalism, anti-intellectualism, and downright fascism? 
It seems telling that the rjse of tbe right and erosion of support for the EU coincides with the loss of WW2 vets.  The agony of selling bananas in kilos in England didn't really seem like such a big deal when you were regularly eating a meal with a survivor of WW2.
I'm not convinced that the European union, or American politicians and voters, have tried hard to imagine the brutality of Assad (a leader who has destroyed his own country to keep hold of it) or Erdogan. <br/><br/>Ah, these Syrians and Egyptians, they're  foreign people. Brown. <br/><br/>Tribalism clarifies everything. <br/><br/>What we each don't fully realize is that we, or our sons and daughters (and grandchildren?)<br/>might be killed in WWIII. <br/><br/>Yeah, I know that sounds ridiculous. After all, we're protected from Europe and Saudi Arabia (usually) by a couple of oceans. <br/><br/>And our troops won't be suffocated in 1917 muddy bloody trenches or evaporated by an atomic bomb in Hiroshima. We're past that. Now we all have drones. <br/><br/>NOBODY CAN NEGOTIATE FAIR INRERNATIONAL ALLIANCES UNLESS HE OR SHE CAN IMAGINE THAT PEOPLE (even brown people) LOVE THEIR CHILDREN AND HOPE THEY WILL NOT DIE.
Let's ask two very basic questions. First, how many immigrants is to many? Second, what if, just if, these hundreds of thousands (millions?) don't assimilate into the native cultures and create an ethic culture of their own?
Once again, the same inaccurate (and journalistically lazy) misuse of the term "populism"?<br/><br/>"Populism" is support for the concerns of ordinary people and policies/politicians advocating this. <br/><br/>Populism is NOT right-wing extremism, nationalism, racism, jingoism, xenophobia and/or financial irresponsibility!<br/><br/>Is it REALLY so hard to be accurate?  We really expect better from the Times!<br/><br/>Language matters!  Ask Orwell or look at Trump's abuse of language and logic.
"But there is also plenty to celebrate for people who believe that Europe will be safer and more prosperous if countries work together and keep their doors open to the world, rather than retreat into nationalism and isolationism. And there are lessons to be learned. The biggest winners have been those leaders who embraced liberal, pro-European Union values with the same passion and emotion as the populists." This is but another blanket left-wing propaganda statement based on value judgments that no intelligent person accepts unequivocally.  "Nationalism" used to be called patriotism and national cultures were rich with diverse traditions based on a common heritage. Yet this one-sided rant with its value-lite prattle has become the norm in the New York Times which has opted to claim the carpet-bagging rhetoric of the moment into an anti-right spewing of distaste.
Tolerating the intolerance of Muslim immigrants is not in the best interest of women, gays and others, including those of Jewish ancestry.
The relevance and power of opinion is often a function of its pedigree. Just look at the title of the author's book, and you can see why this piece is biased against  popular opinion against migrants and Muslim refugees. The new derogatory term for popular opinion of the masses is "populism". If one (in this case, a very large part of the population) is against full-length body veils, shariah, honor killings, anti-Semitism, anti-Christian and "Islamization" of the society, then one is labeled a "populist", almost as damning as a "racist" or "misogynist".
The media has allowed politicians who are anything but populist to hijack Populism for their own ends. Eugene V. Debs was a populist. Bernie Sanders might yet be a 21st century populist. Trump, LePen, Putin, the Brexit folks, all F-A-S-C-I-S-M, i.e, ultra-nationalism as a cover for state-sponsored capitalism favoring the friendly oligarchs over all other lesser competitors. (And their voters: Populism's OK for nativists, not for other countries, because we can block their imports but they better not block our exports.) Learn to say the F-word out loud already, will you?
The populist right feeds off the mistakes of the limousine liberals on the left. The limousine liberals have sufficient wealth to avoid seeing or rubbing up against the people who have been brought into their countries and are changing them, most often for the worse. The immigrants include Muslims, Africans and other groups of people who entered Europe and the 21st century at the same time. The values they bring with them, in many cases, are those of medieval times. It is one thing to bring in people from the middle ages with the expectation that these immigrants will adapt too their new lands, but that expectation has never been articulated by those European leaders who are now being savaged by populists across Europe. <br/><br/>The nationalist antipathy towards the immigrants is a more or less natural reaction to the situation those native Europeans, unlike the leaders of Europe, find themselves in...rubbing shoulders with and living in communities with people who refuse to adapt to even the 19th or 20th centuries, let alone the 21st. Until more European leaders figure out that European values are important enough to demand that newcomers make some effort to assimilate to them populism is going to continue to grow.
the Old colonialist powers of France and England are responsible for their problems it is called a blowback.
"You win by matching the emotions of the nationalists, not by pandering to them."<br/><br/>Nationalism has been demonised since the end of WW2, because of its negative associations, especially with Nazism. However, the Nazis didn't only see themselves as nationalists, but also as socialists, which, like nationalism, was also incorporated into the name of their party.<br/><br/>It's very interesting to note that today, the political Left ignores the "socialism" in National Socialism, while demonising and seeking to suppress the "nationalism".<br/><br/>Fact is that nationalism and socialism are BOTH deeply rooted in human tribal nature, which is why, historically, they have been such powerful motivators, not just of the masses.<br/><br/>If the Left, whose twisted and disparate ideology in respect to nationalism and socialism has effectively become (welfare) state ideology, believes it can continue to demonise and suppress nationalist sentiments, it is very much mistaken. They will not peak before the liberal-left, with its statist and globalist ideology (promoting the madness of mass immigration and DIVERSITY), has been swept away. And the sooner those on the liberal-left (most of whom mean well, I know) realise this, the better.
I have a sinking feeling that the US Democratic Party leadership is not listening.
Hope that it will peak soon!  It's a pathetic mess now.
As far as France is concerned, it is yet too early to judge. Clearly if Le Pen wins, the wave cannot be said to have crested.<br/><br/>If Macron wins, which appears to be the likely scenario, his 5-year presidency would have to go miserably wrong for Le Pen or the FN to make a comeback in 2022. The French republican Right put up a miserable dishonest and corrupt candidate this time around. We have to assume the candidate in 2022 will be stronger, sapping strength from the FN. <br/><br/>If Le Pen loses AND if Macron does a reasonable job during the next five years AND if Le Pen runs again in 2022, she will not get past the first round.<br/><br/>But the real test as to whether the wave is rising or cresting in France will come in June when the parliamentary elections occur. Without a standard bearer from either the right or the left as president, it is impossible to predict the makeup of the legislative body. The FN has never done well in the parliament, rarely winning any seats at all. But this year, anything can happen.
If America's (and humanity's) sense of unity is to become manifest, then those who now see the march of global civilization as threatening to an archaic "me-first" way of life, must be allowed to inform the collective of it's notions for our future.  That's what we're feeling now.<br/><br/>Just as the changes of our adolescence generated peer pressures toward greater cooperative maturity, so also is today's nationalism affirming the value of our global reach and collective maturity.  While collective maturity is not inevitable, the forces of unity generated by nationalism are powerful and spread around the planet.<br/><br/>Nationalists are populists only to the extent that they drive collective consciousness toward greater unity.
The human brain is designed to remember the negative more than the positive. And we are influenced by each other - anxiety, fear, anger, hatred expressed by  one person will be amplified in a group unless the group is quite stable. Populism is essentially an emotional response to threat. We will never be free of it until we each honestly address our own fears. 
Unless something crazy happens, it looks like the FN will be staved off in France at least for this election cycle. As the article points out, it is not clear how the nationalists/populists could realistically win/influence policy in Germany (again in this cycle) as long as Merkel prevents her own party from tilting to nationlism as the social democrat alternative is even more pro-European. <br/><br/>The upcoming European election we should be worrying about is the next Italian election. Renzi seems to want one for late 2017/early 2018 in order to stage his comeback, and the 5 Star Mouvement is right there with the left in the polls. Remember how heavily the European banking sector is invested in Italian bonds ....
"You win by matching the emotions of the nationalists, not by pandering to them."<br/><br/>This is exactly the prescription progressives in America need to embrace.  For most Trump supporters, emotion is the only connection they have to reality,  and it drives every decision they make, every action they take, and certainly everything they believe.  Because they have nothing but contempt for facts, evidence, or truth, what they believe becomes the basis for all discourse.  The task is to make them see the emotional appeal of reality, in spite of everything Pumpkinhead might say.  Convince them it's unpatriotic to be a billionaire, because it is.
You are misusing the word, Populism.  Please stop. It makes me angry when people try to turn populism into something bad. Populism is not a bad term. IT is merely the will of the people. That is what democracy is too. The people you are talking about are far right radicals. They do not represent the "people". I have been noticing this in the media for months now and it seems to be the job of a journalist is to use the correct words. It's your job. 
Put my comment back up. Calling the game before it is over needs to be part of this discussion.
Peaked?  They haven't really even gotten started.  Nationalism to fascism is a time honored sport amongst the Europeans.  They've been doing it for millenia.
Please stop calling these fascist racist bigots "populists".  They are nothing of the sort.  The kindest term for them is "tribalists" which is far more accurate as they are for their various White, Christian tribes, and not populist at all.<br/>I don't know when racist and neo-nazi groups adopted the term "populist" but the ORIGINAL "Populist Party" in the USA in the late 19th Century was for the ordinary farmers and agrarian workers seeking to break the oligopsony of Eastern grain brokers.  They campaigned for an expanded money supply via bi-metalism and were absorbed into the Democratic Party with the nomination of Wm. Jennings Bryan instead of Grover Cleveland (a gold bug).<br/><br/>While there were definite elements of racism and anti-Semitism in the original Populist movement, it was ancillary and tangential to the thrust of what they sought: greater egalitarian treatment of farmers so that they, too, could weather the boom and bust cycles and prosper.<br/><br/>So calling the fascist, White supremacist movements in Europe and North America "populist" is a complete adulteration of language.  They are reactionaries, racists, bigots, ie, tribalists.
All of us should visit the European WW1 and WW2 cemeteries and ask if our aims are worthy of the sacrifice they represent..  
And we should be very afraid:<br/><br/>"...Indeed, some in the Trump administration have embraced the value of a far-right coalition between the United States and Europe.<br/>Leading the way is Trump’s chief White House strategist, Stephen Bannon M.B.A. ’85 , the former chairman of Breitbart Media, a pro-Trump online news outlet. Breitbart has been something of a safe harbor for white nationalists, Neo-Nazis, and other digitally savvy right-wing fringe groups.<br/>It’s an assertion Bannon appears to agree with, once referring to Breitbart as the “home of the alt-right.”<br/>Shortly after the election, Breitbart announced it would expand to France and Germany to help bring Trumpism to audiences there. During a rare public appearance last week, Bannon, widely-seen as Trump’s ideological compass, said their victory made clear that there is a political “movement” afoot, one in which the administration’s “economic nationalist agenda” will help galvanize the Republican Party, and the nation, into “a new political order....”<br/><br/><a href="http://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2017/02/in-europe-nationalisms-rising/" title="http://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2017/02/in-europe-nationalisms-rising/" target="_blank">http://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2017/02/in-europe-nationalisms-ris...</a>
We can only hope the Liberals of the EU lose in a large way and push Communism and Socialism to the back burner.
The author is a classic moral exhibitionist. She favors massive Third World immigration into Europe, but she doesn't even try to explain why this is in the interests of the people of Europe. She doesn't even seem particularly interested in the question! She focuses instead on moral condemnation of the "extreme" right for its language, and for "hate crimes" (which also usually just involve language). It doesn't seem to occur to her that if you want to provoke hostility, flooding peoples' homes with strangers is one of the most effective ways to do it.<br/><br/>Current levels of immigration will, within a single lifetime, turn the peoples of Europe into ethnic minorities in their own countries. If you are really determined to force this, you need to come up with a better justification than vague appeals to "tolerance" and "dignity." Unless, that is, your true concern is simply to flatter your own superior moral sensibilities.
Some liberals are to blame for the rise of the right.<br/>We are simply not allowed to talk about problems with immigration without being labelled as xenophobs. But there are problems.<br/>The most refugees are peaceful and law-abiding people. About 4% of the migrants, that are coming to europe are criminals or do cause severe problems. And migrants which are prone to criminality always coming from a very few countries, namely north africa, former yugoslavia and chechnia. And coincidentally these are also countries where there is no war or other reasons for accepting asylum.<br/>If we would pursue a much harder deportation to these safe countries, we would get rid of those migrants, that cause most of the social problem.<br/>We could provide much more resources to refugees, if we would not have to focus on criminals. But we are not allowed to even think about this.<br/>Another issue are hate preachers. Some of these preachers are even not refugees or legal migrants, they get financed by saudi-arabia, egypt or recently even by turkey and spread their venom among muslims, who are often in need for spiritual backing.<br/>Many muslims propagate anti western slogans only after heavily indoctrinated, while their influence makers stay hidden. It is absolute poison to see these clerics speading their filth. Yet nothing is done, all in the name of liberalism.<br/>It is in the hand of politicians to defuse much of the hate dynamics, but they are to diffident. 
Why are terrorist attacks never mentioned when the talk turns to hate crimes?
Really? The populations of third world countries will quickly swamp central Europe and the U.S. if we allow it. This is not a liberal-conservative issue but liberals want to deny the basic math. Just look at a world population density map. 
Typical of a Times opinion -- one sided and not completely,accurate, either.  Why is it so impossible for certain elements of this news organization to grasp the fact that much of the so-called populism has been generated by the tragedies of Rotherham, Charlie Hebdo, and the other assorted killing sprees that have taken place in the UK, France, Germany, Belgium and Sweden lately?  Perhaps personal safety is as much of a motivation to curb migration as so-called xenophobia.  
Immigrants armed after entry are not invaders?
How about beating back the radical Left? See it from that perspective New York Times. You know, the Leftists who want Brussels to run Europe as opposed to local nation-states having a say. The same Leftists who want no borders and immigrants from a foreign culture without vetting of any kind so their corporate pals can benefit from cheap labor. The populists are not '' radicals'' they are the average man or woman who are tired of being told what to do,what to think and how to  act by globalists hiding out in Brussels.
The drawing and article are misleading. The author has obviously no clue about Emmanuel Macron. The guy has no program. He just picks trending keywords like a twitter bot and throw them at his audience. He reminds me of Conway in House of Cards but without the eloquence. Fake, fake, fake.
People voted for Trump to preserve the US as a Constitutional Republic with the rule of law. As opposed to a fascist  European stile welfare state.    Which is where it seemed the Democrat party wanted to take the country. Obama " I want to fundamentally change America"   
"You win by matching the emotions of the nationalists, not by pandering to them."<br/><br/>Nationalism has been demonised since the end of WW2, because of its negative associations, especially with Nazism. However, the Nazis didn't only see themselves as nationalists, but also as socialists, which, like nationalism, was also incorporated into the name of their party.<br/><br/>It's very interesting to note that today, the political Left ignores the "socialism" in National Socialism, while demonising and seeking to suppress the "nationalism".<br/><br/>Fact is that nationalism and socialism are BOTH deeply rooted in human tribal nature, which is why, historically, they have been such powerful motivators, not just of the masses.<br/><br/>If the Left, whose twisted and disparate ideology in respect to nationalism and socialism has effectively become (welfare) state ideology, believes it can continue to demonise and suppress nationalist sentiments, it is very much mistaken. They will not peak before the liberal-left, with its statist and globalist ideology (promoting the madness of mass immigration and DIVERSITY), has been swept away. And the sooner those on the liberal-left (most of whom mean well, I know) realise this, the better. <br/><br/>I elaborate on these existential issues in my blog: <a href="http://philosopherkin.blogspot.co.uk/2016/10/political-implications-of-evolutionary.html" title="http://philosopherkin.blogspot.co.uk/2016/10/political-implications-of-evolutionary.html" target="_blank">http://philosopherkin.blogspot.co.uk/2016/10/political-implications-of-e...</a> 
"Dark clouds have been hovering over Europeans who believe in an integrated, tolerant and open Continent."<br/><br/>I note that the word "democratic" is missing.  The imposition of the Lisbon Treaty on the British people without the referendum which had been promised and which was the basis on which the then government was elected and which about 82% wanted and in which 70% wanted to say NO!! demonstrated that the "EU" is nauseatingly, arrogantly and brass-facedly anti-democratic.<br/><br/>Helmut Schmidt the ex-German Chancellor who let Greece into the "EU" called for a putsch.  I know of no protests from "EU"-supporters.<br/><br/>There have been calls for an "EU"-Army and the  abolition of national armies.<br/><br/>Some are calling for a "strong leader."  The German word for leader is Führer.<br/><br/>The nauseating fascists, the Romans, Charlemagne and Napoleon are heroes for many "EU"-fanatics.<br/><br/>The Euro is destroying the economies of Greece, Italy, Spain and France and others.<br/><br/>Instead of abolishing the Euro, they want more integration.  The Euro is about the "European Idea" and demonstrates that no matter how stupid and destructive an idea is, if it is part if the "Euueopean Idea" it will be pursued.<br/><br/>The "dark cloud" is the "EU".<br/><br/>French people should vote for Le Pen. <br/><br/>Any faults she has are much less serious than those of Macron.
This is, in this article, the conventional maddening statement in defense of the status quo:<br/>"But there is also plenty to celebrate for people who believe that Europe will be safer and more prosperous if countries work together and keep their doors open to the world, rather than retreat into nationalism and isolationism."<br/>Wonderful prosperous Europe of countries  that work together and keep their doors open to the world, Indeed, it sounds so nice.<br/>But this is the same Europe that neglects its youth and allows a great many of  them to become an underclass living sordid lives with no interesting work, no income, little future. The same Europe that constantly cuts back on subsidized art and recreation and entertainment, allowing corporations to skim the cream off the society even as they make it crasser and crasser. The same Europe that neglects the old. The same Europe where the comfortable don´t give a damn about anything except their comfort.<br/>That is why it is under attack, Europe.<br/>It is not the right or the populist right that are the enemy. It is the bourgeois themselves being so bourgeois, that is, we ourselves, us, the eternally selfish and smug, who are the enemy.<br/>When will we get that through our thick heads!<br/>If we don't, from the right or from the left, the people left out will attack the system.<br/>And then that nice prosperous idealistic open Europe (of the global concentraton of wealth) will become a giant police state.<br/>As is already happening.
Democratism has proven to be Marxism by another name. Marxism is stupid and has been shown to fail everywhere it is shoved down otherwise free people's throats. Perhaps history is not repeating itsel and the folks are casting off the shackles of Democratism before it becomes full blown totalitarian communism. Americans are disgusted with Democratism. The Democratic Party is imploding, but you wouldn't know it listening to the progressive liberal marxist elitist "intellectual" idiots in media and academia. Denial ain't a river in Egypt.
There are those that say another world war is just over the horizon.  Political trends around the globe, to some, are exacerbating the theory that a another war will happen.  If some of the leading political characters so far are any indication, perhaps the theory is correct.  Something has to give.  It'll be interesting to see what that is.
We all are battling a war of meaning. The term populism must be examined by each person using it to see how it affects others, and to understand how this Trojan Horse of authoritarianism and fascism within has been used before to dismantle the rule of the voter and the people. Trump, like the later Caesars Berlusconi and Jean Marie Le Pen, fool only the angry masses who will turn to demagogues in their fear. Those with more perspective must now use their words to make this danger as clear as it should be, for all to act in their real interest and to help prevent another showdown of egos with weapons ready. 
The European Union, in its drive to assure governance of and by the bureaucrat, have missed the fact that the French like to be French, the Italians want to be Italians, the Germans enjoy being Germans, and the British are never going to become "Europeans".<br/><br/>And, governance that fails to respect the cultural natures of our communities exposes itself the types of political pressures that now are being seen across the free world.<br/><br/>If the governing bodies don't mover to create the change that is required, The People will do it.  That is what good democracy is all about...governance of the people, by the people and for the people.<br/><br/>The People are speaking.
In Europe the elites are pretty tone deaf.  The German's insist on austerity because of the 1930s.  This leads to disaster economic outcomes throughout Europe.  It is time for greater flexibility and heeding the need of ordinary people to believe that their interests are the concern of their leaders.
Yes. But we need two things, not only the democratic passion she insists on. We need ideas and programs to adress the current, ongoing crisis of liberal institutions and neoliberal policies. The institutions must be stregthened. The policies must be replaced.
I don't see why tolerance for diversity is talked about in an all or nothing context. Perhaps there is a rate at which unfamiliar social customs and values can be comfortably accommodated?  It might be preferable to control the acceptance of immigrants to some upper limit rather than risk a draconian populist backlash.
I recall as a youth a friend of my parents opining that nationalism is the world's greatest political scourge. He had lived through WW2 and perhaps even fought in it, so he had more than passing awareness whereof he spoke.<br/><br/>Today, we lack the direct collective memory of the direst consequences of right-wing nationalism so we no longer take it seriously enough. I lack it too even though I was born in 1939. I read, however. <br/><br/>The depth of cruel human depravity throughout wartime Europe was beyond imagining. Only the collective resistance of internationally allied human decency stopped it after 60 million lives lost and untold collateral carnage.<br/><br/>This should remind President Trump what "carnage" really means. Either he hasn't a clue or he just doesn't care. What worries me is whether we care enough to terminate our political nightmare through any and all constitutional means possible. 
There are two thoughts to bear in mind.  One, welcoming all refugees who want to flee their circumstances is the humane, moral thing to do.  This is undeniable, and if I were a refugee myself, I would hope to find a place to retreat to.  <br/><br/>The other thought is that there is a matter of numbers to consider.  The Davos class likes open borders because they imagine those moving would be 'just us'. A small number of people will move.  Numbers mean that 10 refugees are just fine, or 100.  Maybe even 10,000.  But maybe not 10 million.  There is a line to be drawn where too many will make a lot of people uncomfortable, and reasonable people may differ on where to locate the line.  <br/><br/>Nothing is easier to predict than that there will be blowback when the numbers get bigger.  You can't just ignore it and focus purely on the moral responsibility and fail to take into account the reaction to the inevitable conflicts that will occur.
I'm suspicious about the overuse of the word "populism", because it's applied to both left and right, with equal disdain. Bernie Sanders may be a 'populist', for instance, but his public policy stances are both honest and (at least according to me) jibe with what a lot of scientists, economists and educators say we need in public policy. Populist, yes. <br/><br/>It seems that the biggest amount of disdain is saved for using 'populist' in terms of riling up uninformed voters: making the dummies all excited so that they vote the wrong way. This is a middling technocrat's view, and it's more or less self-serving, except that that viewpoint didn't seem to serve anyone in the last election, and it doesn't now. <br/><br/>With Trump and the rest of the GOP most of the time, you're simply talking about demagoguery - not populism. It's populism's ugly brother. 
There is certainly a message here for the US as well.  Look at what happened when the passionate anger of whites feeling left behind was channeled by Donald Trump, while Hillary Clinton tried the "facts and figures" policy based approach and failed to stir much passion even among lifelong Democrats.  We ignore that lesson at our peril.  If Democrats cannot come up with candidates that can make people believe in something and feel strongly about it, they will continue to fail at the polls, while Republicans who successfully channel voters' emotions, even negative emotions, will win.
The Euro is destroying much of Europe.<br/><br/>The economic woes are worse in countries which are at the edge of the "EU" and in the Eurozone.<br/><br/>Finnland is worse off than Sweden.<br/><br/>Portugal is worse off than Poland.<br/><br/>Greece is worse off than everybody.<br/><br/>Germany is doing well but not as well as Switzerland which  is not in the Euro.<br/><br/>Catastrophe had been predicted if the UK voted to leave the "EU" but it hasn't happened.<br/><br/>The Pound did fall but that has led to more empolyment and higher production.<br/><br/>Greece's currency cannot fall in the same way because Greece is shackled to the Euro.<br/><br/>France is also schackled to the Euro and should leave asap but Macron wouldn't do that and Le Pen would.
The elephant in the room is that if, by miracle, all people currently inhabiting Earth are lifted from poverty to the economic status of the US/EU middle class, can our planet physically sustain that. I understand the desire of the Western ruling elites to gain more political and economic power by redistributing wealth from rich to poor countries, but it has to blow up badly in the end.
It seems to me that you’re promoting the same feelings of nationalism—abroad, but not at home, as if there is something nobler for the French about feelings for Europe than about feelings for France. Everyone agrees that it’s not a great choice of candidates for the French, but it is a choice, between their identity as French and an identity as Europeans—a nation versus a currency, a choice they may never get again if Macron wins; if they do, it will surely not take place under happier circumstances.
Angela Merkel made two serious mistakes which led to strengthing European populism:  Her resentment-generating severity in Germany's bail-out of Greece.  And her insanely naive admittance of 800,000 refugees all at once, many of whose values are inconsistent with Euro-secular-gender-equality values.  I live in a high immigration US region and am very comfortable with and very liberal regarding both documented and undocumented border crossers.   But even I knew that a huge inflow of nearly a million refugees all at once was not going to turn out well.   
This journalist is completely out of touch with the European problems. Europe faces immigration issues that the US can't even imagine. And the EU rules are aggravating the situation because the economic situations are very different from one country to the other but borders are fully open. Europe, contrary to the US, has been doing a very poor job in integrating its immigration population mostly for two reasons: no pride of being European as immigrants in the US have to be proud of being in the US with the daily pledge to the American flag at school for example. Moslem immigration versus mostly Christian immigration in the US.<br/>In this context, and as long as the immigration problem is not properly and toughly handled by national and European authorities, I believe that the anti-immigration movements will continue to grow.
Populism? Call it what it really is: the mob. <br/><br/>But it doesn’t stop there. Metaphorically speaking, the mob is run by the psychological archetype of the vampire. The mob and the vampire have two things in common: they both are incapable of seeing their reflection in the mirror, and they both like the taste of blood. <br/><br/>Transform the image of what is happening in Europe and America from “populism” to “the mob” to “the vampire” and we see what is really at stake. 
The ending quote goes, '' You win by matching the emotions of the nationalists, not by pandering to them.''<br/><br/>    Actually, don't you win political contests by HAVING a position that you think the voters trust you to carry out? Thought and ideas defeat raw emotion every time because humanity needs a positive reason to vote for someone or something.<br/>     Hillary the Entitled lost her race from Day One because she had nothing except her gender and the old chant, ''Hope'' to say to people. She filled up the other 95% of her time shrieking about Trump's faults - and saying nothing about her life of skirting laws about bribery and national security secrets. <br/><br/>     Americans don't vote against very easily. Give us something to support.<br/>Donald Trump promised that he would actually enforce the law regarding people sneaking into our country, and so far that is CLEARLY much better even without help from the frightened flopsies of both parties in Congress.
Nice journalism. The bottom line is, the EU is Germany , with Brussels pushing  paper. Russia has intent, backed by it's people, to re-construct the Prior Soviet Union. Russia needs the population and whatever additional GP new satellites will provide. Nato is the US and may not get involved, why ?
If "populism" is taken to mean "preventing open borders in Europe" as in this article, then "fighting against populism" effectively is the same as "fighting to dilute and then destroy Europe's unique culture through mass immigration from Africa and the Middle East." Why is this considered a liberal cause?  Is seems more like an illiberal cause, since liberalism arose from Europe's unique culture.
Why do we call fascism "populism"? In America, we have equated Donald J Trump (a fascist) with Bernie Sanders (a moderate who supports democratic institutions) by calling them both "populists". The word "populist" no longer has a meaning.  
They teach history in Europe.  They will not elect LePen.
Unlike the US, where we're far from the Middle East and its migrants, Europe can not afford to be "open" to all the migrants from there and from Africa. It"ll be swamped in a matter of a generation. European countries can not be like America of the early 1900's, taking in all kinds of immigrants, no matter what their beliefs are. Why is it so hard to understand, that being open means that Moslems will overtake Europe and she will no longer exist as we know it? Greece, where I was born is already facing an existential danger from being overwhelmed. How can you have open borders, when Europeans can't, or don't want to migrate to the Middle East or Africa? It can't be open borders, when its one way only. Overpopulated Africa and the Muslim world will over run Europe. And, I"m no Trump supporter. But, what's right is right
Perhaps we are not all equal?
Understand that the far right is dangerous to the European Union (and the US).  However, the far left is equally dangerous to the EU and US.  NYTimes, you have had dangerous articles that mis-represent the facts in order to push a far left agenda that you have been embracing, especially for the last 4-5 years.  <br/><br/>Some, just some, moderation?  Or, do you prefer to continue to divide while blaming Trump, just as the far right blamed Obama for the divide?
Wow! The editorial cartoon accompanying the article might just as well have been of policy wonk Hillary and ranting blowhard Trump.<br/><br/>One gives people respect, states reasons for policies and includes all Americans in the national agenda; the other stirs people to anger, makes empty promises and divides and conquers to rule.<br/><br/>America used to set the example - let the world hope those days are over! My message to France?  It happened here; don't let it happen to you.<br/><br/>Chevy<br/>South Hadley, MA
(populism gobalism terms subverted for politica posturing )<br/><br/>Neo populism used as an argument against globalism.<br/><br/>The world is shrinking.  Someone on the other side of the world can read what I have just written seconds after it is posted.  <br/><br/>Globalism is here like it or not.
"Peaked" assumes a lot, assumed by people who have been wrong about voters pretty consistently.<br/><br/>Polls reflect judgments on who to count, who is representative of what. They are not "data" they are a collection of opinions largely hidden from the view of those offered the numbers. It comes of small sample size and difficulty of contacting consistently within the samples.<br/><br/>Le Pen and her opponent nearly tied in the first round, both in the low 20's.<br/><br/>Most other candidates then rallied to oppose her, but not all. About 25% of the vote went to those who did not rally, one of whom will now run with her.<br/><br/>Furthermore, those who did rally against her do not entirely command their own voters, especially not to turn out at all for something they don't really support.<br/><br/>Her "144 commitments" is available on line. There is something there for everyone. There is also something there to appall most everyone. It is also very long, so many people will only read for what they want to see, for or against. This offers opportunity to sway people who just don't like their choices.<br/><br/>Don't go whistling past this graveyard too. Didn't Trump teach us at least that much?
Anyone who is paying attention knows the same scenario is being played out in Europe and around the world as played out in OUR United States of America last year.<br/><br/>The International Mafia and their fox propaganda machine - aided by Steve Bannon and his crowd of paid haters including Russian mafia - are sowing distrust, anger-hate-fear LIES, LIES, LIES to try to destabilize every kind of government control so they can create their Robber Baron kingdom of Insatiably Greedy Predatory Capitalism and control the world.<br/><br/>This is not a "novel".  This is not "Game of Thrones" or "House of Cards" or "VEEP" or "Madame Secretary" or "Survival" or any of the violent, angry, warrior propaganda they try to feed us every hour of every day to get ready for their violent warrior world.  This is real-time real life.<br/><br/>WE - The Good People of America - are the only ones who can stop it and WE must do it now.  BEFORE  they can further destroy OUR lives and world.  
The problem for the EU is the inordinate power of Germany within it.  After the 2008 financial meltdown the European Lifestyle Superpower became the great German shakedown to bail out its banks at the southern tier of the EUs expense.  This has added a great deal to the desire of citizens to want to get out from the perpetual austerity the EU through Germany inflicts on people.  Much the same has happened in the US as the Republicans refuse to allow the gov't to do things that it is well equipped to do like repair the decaying infrastructure in the US.  Zero sum politics have helped conservative parties throughout the West.  Populism as espoused by people like Trump is just a phony lie to play on voters baser instincts and ignorance.  Le Pen speaks of getting out of the EU which certainly has been gaining in resonance with the austerity driven endless recession in Italy and other places.  Le Pen uses immigration as Trump to argue that these people are ruining their culture.
Charlotte McDonald-Gibson has failed to point out that Marine Le Pen and her ally, Nicolas Dupont-Aignan received only 21.3% and 4.7% of the votes respectively during the first round of France's presidential election. What seems to drown out  Marine Le Pen's anti-immigrant rhetoric is Euroskepticism:  Le Pen's rival, the far-left candidate Jean-Luc Mélenchon captured 19.58% of the votes. Le Pen and Mélenchon together won nearly 41% of the votes on the ticket of anti-EU, anti-globalisation etc. Economic issues motivate many French to leave the EU and embrace economic nationalism.<br/>In Germany - like the Netherlands - economy is robust. Populists need to tap into issues like national identity and culture etc. to galvanise support for their cause. Indeed, populism rises to the occasion when there is a political crisis, and it should serve as a wakeup call for politicians to get their act together.  
"Populism": derogatory term for democracy, used when democratic outcomes don't agree with the user's ideology.
"Derogatory language once unthinkable".....Trump is a vulgar bigoted narcissist with a short attention span. The tragedy of his elevation is that his language and behavior gives license to everyone who is cortex challenged to express the darker side of their nature. The value, if there is one, is that it sends a message  that the potential elements of de-civilization lie dormant just below the surface in far too many of our fellow citizens. It is a reminder that we have to be ever vigilant if we are to continue to make progress beyond the level of our cave dwelling ancestors.   
The author is only focussed on refugee crisis. Thats utterly wrong. <br/><br/>Refugee crisis is under control since spring 2016. Thats why Mr. Rutte has recovered from worse figures at the end of 2016 and why AfD is stagnating or losing now. The crucial problem is current integration of immigrants who are already in Europe - some more than 50 years. <br/><br/>Integration had been only more or less succesful. Less in most French "banlieu"<br/><br/><a href="https://tinyurl.com/l74lra5" title="https://tinyurl.com/l74lra5" target="_blank">https://tinyurl.com/l74lra5</a><br/><br/>and some small German quarters like Duisburg-Marxloh and Berlin "Cotti" area, mixed in Germany as we have see recently on Turkish referendum<br/><br/><a href="https://tinyurl.com/laqcqt3" title="https://tinyurl.com/laqcqt3" target="_blank">https://tinyurl.com/laqcqt3</a><br/><br/>Because it is existentially pressing to get this in line France had to refuse taking more refugees in recent crisis because this would have been an aggravation of the situation in he already boiling "banlieu" and "old industrial" area in "Nord" area.<br/><br/><a href="https://tinyurl.com/koormhp" title="https://tinyurl.com/koormhp" target="_blank">https://tinyurl.com/koormhp</a><br/><br/>These are serious problem to face. Because Germany had capacities it was able to make strong efforts as Ms Eddy and Mr. Lyman have shown in this ecxellent coverage<br/><br/><a href="https://tinyurl.com/mp57qhp" title="https://tinyurl.com/mp57qhp" target="_blank">https://tinyurl.com/mp57qhp</a><br/><br/>To keep the boat afloat it cannot bear any additional burden. It is still afloat in Netherlands Germany and Austria in the eyes of the people despite huge costs, alarming crime rates and growing unemployment.  <br/><br/>Operating social state, no permanent Ghettos and no banlieu are seen as  existential - therefore crucial - by all Europeans. <br/><br/>Its NOT a matter of nice language, declarations or opinion.
This writer is tarring Marine Le Pen with every sin her father and party have committed for the last 40 years. It's her own fault for not convincingly made her case that she is not her father's values. Now nobody believes her when she claims otherwise.<br/><br/>Marine should have broken off from her party and created an entirely new one with her own separate platform. The French find it almost impossible to see her in any light than her father's antisemitism and fascism.<br/><br/>The European Union was a mistake and has stolen France's sovereignty and local currency.  Marine is right to propose leaving the EU and returning to the Franc. Marine is the only presidential candidate that will break off from the status quo and the establishment.<br/><br/>It's time for Marine Le Pen!
Too bad the Dems didn't learn the lesson in the US expressed in the final line.
It is very confusing to associate Merkel's--and her finance minister Schaeuble's-- "austerity" policies (which amount to pro-banking, anti-poor positions) with the left. The same appears to be true for Macron and his neo-liberal policies.<br/><br/>Countries with a colonialist past (UK, France, The Netherlands) or countries with a history of dependence or acceptance of other ethnic groups (the US) may indeed have little ethical room to complain about multiculturalism. But why should traditionally homogeneous cultures be branded as part of the right if they complain about being inundated by refugees of a very different cultural heritage? Who invented this totally inappropriate nonsense and for what purpose? Trump was the outcome of decades of neglect of the working class' interests under Democrats more interested in donations from Wall Street, Big Oil, and Big Pharma. When the New York Times chooses an anti-climate change skeptic as a new columnist (for "diversity's sake) it never considered its complete lack of pro-Bernie Sanders columnists.<br/><br/>An interesting game, this. 
The real problem is that the Neoliberal Utopia of the European Union has always had a dark underbelly that none of its leaders have been willing to confront.<br/>.<br/>For many working class people in Europe, the EU does not represent a place that is "open, integrated, and tolerant."  It represents a place that has conspired against them: leaving them vulnerable to terrorist attacks, depressed wages and joblessness, deteriorating towns and a deteriorating way of life.  These concerns are rooted in reality; they are valid.  And until Angela Merkel and other EU leaders recognize them, empathize with them, and adjust their policies to help them - there will always be a populist backlash.  We can only pray it doesn't fall into outright Neo Nazism, but it well could somewhere.
   Populism in Europe is playing with fire, as it seems to disregard the essential role of the European Union's interdependence: no chance for war among them. That it needs reform, particularly in relation to the common currency, the Euro, indeed. Do we really have to lose what we have, before we realize its value...and too late for redemption? Brexit may prove to be a calamity, as time will tell, and a pariah nation when not called at a time of vital decisions for survival, even greatness. And Poland and Hungary are shooting themselves in the foot by their pseudo-religious isolationism, after being saved, and integrated, once free from the Russian claws of servitude. Oh well, no one ever claimed a shortage of stupidity in our by-force petty interests.
What Putin and Assad spoke of, the pretext is fabricated.
"...Europeans who believe in an integrated, tolerant and open Continent."<br/>In other words, those who agree with your leftists views of open borders and immigration for all.  <br/><br/>The problem is not how to confront the "far-right", the problem is how to stop the destruction of Europe from the machinations of the self-hating left.
Populism subverted to an us vs them political rallying point.<br/><br/>Right wing populism vs left wing populism is a subversion of populism.<br/>It is simply *the same old left wing vs right wing* with no concern for the average person.<br/><br/>This neo-populist logic and effort, created in the name of the majority, in reality ends up serving the interests of the wealthy, more special interests, and a selected few political opportunists.
Speaking strictly to the German elections, I am fairly certain that unless there is some catastrophic event involvong Islamic fundamentalists, or covert Russian involvement, chance for the right-wing AfD, and ultra-right-wing NPD stand little  chance of making  majority splash in the Bundestag.<br/>And while CDU-frontrunner Angela Merkel might face stark opposition from SPD-candidate Martin Schulz, she may also want to keep her eye on sister conservative party CSU's Horst Seehofer, who may have some ideas of his own. 
We need Le Pin to win, that will mark the the event well!
As the Media are currently using the term " Populism " and applying in a derogatory fashion , shows just how tone deaf they are . No wonder they were stunned when Clinton lost .
The volcano of populism is not by any means declining, but slowly rising to soon erupt.  More candidates like Wilders, LePen and Hofer are rising up to protect the ideals of European citizens, who see their values being challenged by the influx of immigrants who demand to have the parity of rights the Europeans have, while not accepting the rights of the Europeans themselves. A curious paradox.. How many churches are there in Saudi Arabia? Crimes go unreported for fear of stoking the nationalism that once burned out of control consuming Europe in its ignominious flames. In Germany, the gracious host, areas of the cities have become unsafe for even the police to enter.<br/> Brits vote is a clear mandate that they are tired of the Brussels telling them what they have to do, especially with quotas of immigrants, who quickly drain the social welfare coffers of not just Britain, but Holland, France and Germany as well leaving less for the tax paying citizens for whom it was intended. The exit voice becomes louder in Holland, France &amp; Germany who are facing the same financial problems as well as areas even police are reluctant to enter.<br/> Many thought Le Pen would never reach the run-off, but inspired by Trump’s win here and the citizens’ need for a voice that represents them against the onslaught of immigrants. The silent, complacent majority is becomes more outspoken as they see rights being impinged upon, communities being transformed and their cultural values being usurped.
10 years ago, nobody was talking about the destabilization of Europe. All this has happened since the Syrian Civil War started in 2011, creating over 4 million refugees, all heading toward Europe, and some toward the United States, Canada, and Australia. Subsequently, they have been joined by millions of other economic refugees from both Northern and sub-Saharan Africa - all heading to the same destinations. <br/><br/>So now, per this author, "Dark clounds" are gathering over those who believe in a "tolerant, integrated, and open" Europe. Is this somehow surprising? In another article in the Times today, we read this from a Muslim immigrant in France:<br/><br/>"Although Ms. Seddiki said she would vote reluctantly for Mr. Macron, she feared she was an exception: “White people who say ‘You have to vote against Marine Le Pen because you will lose more than we will’ don’t realize that for us, we already live in a racist country.” NYT, 5/1/17 <br/><br/>Is it any surprise that those who once welcomed such people with open arms are offended? And once people start tossing around insults like "racist" or "Islamophobe" discussion ends - and people are left to stew. Nothing gets resolved because every discussion is stopped with such accusations. This situation is not going to end soon, or well. This is more than mere culture clash. It's up close and personal - and as the newly arrived get ever bolder expressing their contempt for the native peoples, it gets dangerous, too. 
"Populism" is not the same as actual "power to the people."  Almost always in history it has represented a mere rhetorical disguise for an elite of wealth and/or authority to use the people for its own gain in even greater profits or power: for example, Trump and his allegedly "reworked" -- but still essentially uber-capitalist -- GOP of  today.  The idea of a "people's billionaire" is absurd.
The radical Left, represented by Hollande the Failure and Barack the Globalist Ideologue will always be the problem. The Adults are now coming back in charge and those sad progressives who think that mankind is failing and they are the only ones who have solutions ti ''fix'' us are simply being sent to their rooms without supper.<br/>    Once again the angry graspers of the failing media world let their ideology warp their reporting. Are there no professionals left on the upper west side at all? 
If  national identity means nothing we would still be ruled by Britain. 
Putin's armies of agents, trolls and news-faker hackers are doing a marvelous job of assisting in normalizing their evil creations in Europe and North America. Even they should now take pause and consider if their handiwork has gone too far, even  for their own good.<br/>As to how best combat them, the left needs a more coherent immigration stance and a strategic pause in identity politics campaigning along with actively fighting the fake news proponents supported by the KGB and their fearless leader.<br/>Must get moose and squirrel!
It's the globalist left that has destroyed Europe, not the populist nationalist right. <br/><br/>If this author can't see that, she is ideologically blind. 
This opinion piece is a complete misread of current events.  The author attempts to fit current societal/political trends into the framework of yesteryear.  We all understand the past and cling to its lessons and patterns., as the future is never known.  As the saying goes, "the future aint what it used to be".<br/>There's probably some game theory experts in some dark, hidden think tanks that arent talking to us right now. who have a well grounded understanding of what "might" happen in the future.....but I refuse to equate European politics of today, with Europe's often violent past.<br/>The one common factor I will note, is this.....Europe is overpopulated.....and THAT leads to problems.<br/>A so-called "refugee" that is rowing like mad to Europe is simply jumping from the frying pan into the fire.<br/>France will never acceed to Germanic control....nor will Germany acceed to Frankish control.....this unbroken rule goes all the way back to Charlemagne's sons...when they broke up the region known as the Holy Roman Empire(Roman Catholics....state religion, anyone?).<br/>Thus, I think it more likely that the Political rhetoric of France will turn towards blaming the Germans and urging a slight break in the EU....with a "Latin Block"....France, Italy, Belgium, Spain....competing with the "Germanic Block"...Germany, East Europe...while a "Balkan Block' continues to struggle.<br/>The Latins will focus on a re-colonization of North Africa to relieve the population pressures.
An apt illustration.  It could've been drawn during Weimar.  
So because Germans are reporting hate crimes committed by Muslims we are supposed to believe this is a sign of something bad?   Your opinion piece underestimates the non-left surge. This is because you have pushed everyone with common sense to the right by setting the bar so low and making populism a bad word.  The facts clearly show that Muslims are indeed committing more crimes per capita than native non-Muslim Europeans. 
Populism is a tiresome trifling euphemism for white European ethnic sectarian supremacist nationalism.  For half a millennia that inhumane inhuman cruel cowardly evil has moved from peak to peak in misogyny, colonialism, imperialism, war, slavery and genocide. <br/><br/>Since the end of World War II, America has been the focus of that lingering empire.  There are more German Americans than there are any kind of ethnic national origin colored other Americans.
If the EU represents anything, it represents the resurrection of the old time Holy Roman Empire of Charlemagne...........complete with "Divine Right of Bankers" to rule the domain.<br/>While the so-called "populists" use so-called "xenophobia" to build their power base.....the unspoken, implied enemy is actually the haughty, single-minded, autocratic Bureaucrats of the EU!!   For it is their high-mindedness that imposed all the Hippie Utopian Rules and Regulations that created "open borders" and "standards for labelling champagne bottles", on and on and on.....just as John Lennon once "imagined".<br/>If the EU bureaucrats dont open their eyes, especially in France, they might find themselves led Marie Antoinette-style...right up to the political guilotine.<br/>The message from Brussels...."Let them eat cake".
Stop using populism to mean right wing- it's uninformed
I'm so sick of the word "populism". When the same word is used to describe Marine Le Pen and Bernie Sanders, it has no practical meaning, except to demonize anyone who isn't gung-ho about global corporate capitalism. It's especially misleading since many of these so-called populists (e.g. Trump) are in reality very pro-corporate. Right-wing, xenophobic fascists are the problem, not "populists", whatever that might mean. 
After the Dutch elections I asked a PVV (Wilders) voter if he was happy with the outcome. He said that he was because he no longer felt safe in his neighborhood because of all the foreigners that had moved in and Wilders would have more influence going forward. I asked if he meant foreigners like me (I am white and well educated) and he said no, the ones "without passports;" the ones from North Africa and "Verwegestan" (far-away-a-stan.)<br/><br/>It reminded me of the white flight that I witnessed growing up as people of color moved into predominantly white areas. That is a uniquely American solution to what is essentially a problem of tribalism and racial identity. The US is large enough and people move with enough frequency that there is a constant self-segregation at work; out of sight, out of mind.<br/><br/>Europe (especially small countries like the Netherlands) is too densely populated for that solution to work. Plenty of communities in the Netherlands are proud to take in refugees and offer to help recent immigrants assimilate. Others complain that immigrants do not even know "how to shop at Albert Heijn" (a national grocery chain.) The only long-term solution, it seems, is for bigotry to die off with the older generations the way homophobia did (to a remarkable degree in the Netherlands.) Let's hope that happens before the angry, nationalist, populist right undoes 70 years of progress towards a peaceful, unified Europe. 
Why exclude the "Right-wing" modifier for "Populism" from the title?   <br/><br/>Of course, few modify the momemt's "populism" at all. But doesn't anyone recall the 1886-1896 populist movement, largest leftist, economically organized  social movement in U.S. history (or Bernie Sanders)?
It would appear that emotions play the crucial role in national elections, both here and abroad leading us into war. <br/><br/>U.S. examples:<br/>Spanish-America War - Hearst Newspaper propaganda.<br/>WW 1 - Panic regarding Germany and unrestricted submarine warfare.<br/>WW 2-  The bombing of Pearl Harbor.<br/>Vietnam - The fear of communistic spread.<br/>Afghanistan - Fear of Taliban.<br/>Iraq - Fear of weapons of mass destruction.<br/><br/>Of course, in these cases, there were real underlying causes, (some good, some not so good). Regardless, war leaves swaths of huge amounts of suffering and death. Politicians learned a long time ago that playing to peoples emotions, rather than rational understand is the key.<br/><br/>So, which will be Trump's war? North Korea (fear of a Nuclear attack)? The middle east? (fear of Sharia law spread)? Only time will tell.
Thank you Ms.Gibson for the ray of hope you outlined in your article, however, like Yogi said," it’s not over till it’s over”.Who should know better than Democrats like myself.<br/>Immigrants are still the stumbling block for progressive Europeans, it will depend upon the speed of assimilation of the immigrants as to how long the European openness will survive.Each terrorist atrocity damages the moderate element in Europe, &amp; enforces extremists like LePen.
Interesting article. However it fails to give an explanation on the reasons, populism is so attractive to so many people. <br/><br/>One of the main reasons, is the fact that the political establishment is inceasingly disconnecting from reality and is unwilling to accept, that many people are overwhelmed by the speed of change and the quick erosion of values.<br/><br/>Particularly mass migration of poorly educated people from alien cultures and their inability to integrate are challenging people's identity. <br/><br/>In such an environment, people with apparent simple answers are felt to be remedy to the uncertainties. <br/><br/>Mainstream politicians respond with ivory tower arguments of human rights, christian obligations of charity etc. <br/><br/>The day to day experience of the average person with migrants is quite different<br/>to what politicians want to make believe. They observe almost daily, that migrants and refugees are exploiting the good will of people. They observe that they have to compete for a job with a migrants, they experience, that migrants are increasingly hollowing the social welfare system.<br/><br/>Under such circumstances it is not suprising that people flock to the Le Pen's, Wilders, Pediga, AfD etc.<br/><br/>Everybody knows that Le Pen is not the answer. Her proposed economic programme is neo communism.  She will, if elected drive France further to the wall. <br/><br/>But most of her supporters are of the opinion, that they have nothing to lose and it can only get better with her.
Now that we have yet another article featuring the term "populism", some of us would welcome an explanation of what it actually means to those who throw it around so freely. Clearly its definition differs among writers: one concluded a rare explication with "xenophobic authoritarianism". But another described Steven Spielberg as a populist storyteller. Clearly not in the same ballpark.<br/><br/>A reader can gather that for most writers it has something to do with rejecting elites and speaking on behalf of the people. But since Progressives generally use it as a negative brand, it is generally implied that it is linked with racism and other standard epithets such as "nativism" (also not clearly defined by its users) so that we can be unambiguously certain that populists are bad people.<br/><br/>Can we appeal to our opinion leaders to come to some consensus on what populism means? Then it can take its proper place in the long list of "-ist" words that we use to characterize the many bad actors in our current dark era.
Thats exactly the message i have posted on the histeric far cry of mr. Cohen, and the dreamingful plot of mr. Douthat ( it's a conicidence they are both republicans?!).<br/><br/>Anyway this article points on the right problem marking the raising of authoritarian parties as steadily part of the politics in european western countries, but miss the big elephant in the room, the Eastern europen countries.<br/><br/>There the threat is higher for two reason<br/>1) They are countries only recently getting out of the russian influence, which is far from being diminished on the economoc side, as the ukrainian crisis has demonstrated. Moreso, mr. Putin has a very instrumental role in the area, both militarly ( ammassing troops on the border near baltic countries ) and economically ( i mention only the gas pipe project southstream to bring gas to europe bypassing ukraine, years in the making).<br/><br/>2) They are struggling economically more than their counterpart in the western. This is partly a problem of have joined the europen union too recently, and not having benefitted wholesome, and the recent wave of refugees who are passing through their territories by the hundreds of thousands. If that sounds populistic, just take a look at how frantically a single camp of hundred refugees in Calais was administered by the french government.<br/>As much as Germany was very useful in relieving the onus from those countries, it still refuses to acknowledge the operational costs they sustained as humanitarian instead of debt.
All all one reads is "Far Right" but in truth many of the policies advocated by the so-called Far Right; the resistance to globalism and the offshoring of jobs, stopping the onshoring of cheap labour, protecting the living standards, and deep misgivings about the influence of totalitarian Islamist thought, are in fact tradional leftist thinking. So the whole left right demarcation is mixed up but some commentators do not see it.
I agree with the statement by another commenter (“Green Tea”) that “Working people want a party that will represent their interests.” However, as Piketty noted, the world’s economic machinery has evolved to a point where capital is rapidly replacing labor. The interests of working people, not to mention the unemployed, won’t be served by throwing sand in the gears of globalization and capitalism (by voting for Trump, or LePen, for example), but would be by a more equitable distribution of the return on capital, i.e., progressive taxation and spending on the common good (education, healthcare, housing, the environment, etc.)  and economic security, perhaps a universal basic income. And how would that ever come to pass, when all the power resides with the neoliberal “elites”? When they’re vastly outnumbered by the rest of us. And we’re heading that way.
Europe's next crucial election is actually in June in the UK. <br/><br/>In this election the only populist party is the SNP, a party that manages to combine hard-left social policies, extreme nationalism and a pro-EU outlook. But that doesn't fit easily into the author's stereotyping so she happily ignores it.<br/><br/>In continental Europe, the collapse of AfD in Germany and a Macron victory in France simply reinforces a more-of-the-same approach . Whether that is a good thing or not is up for debate but I would suggest it is unlikely to slay the dragon of populism that McDonald-Gibson fears so much.<br/><br/>The European Union needs reform - even Macron is saying it - but it cannot bring itself to make the necessary changes. This inflexible attitude has already cost the Union Britain's membership and a continued head-in-the-sand approach is likely to cause more damage in the years ahead.
The definition of populism is "concerns of ordinary people".  "Popular" in its simplest dress.  There is left-wing populism and right-wing populism.  Populism itself has no negative denotations.  If anything populism separates democracy from royalty.  It should not take a retired biologist to point this out to journalists.
Although this article allegedly warns against complacency it cannot resist the temptation.  Macron "will be rewarded" for not being Le Pen: the vote for the FN has been rising steadily since 2002, consisting largely of people ignored and sneered at by the author of this article and her clique. Macron will find that even if he is elected he will be hard pressed to implement policies opposed by most French people outside Parisian cafes 
I still see Le Pen winning. The parallels between her and Trump are many. So is the common thinking about the two countries: France is France and the US is the US, neither is divisible. But the cities are not the whole of either country. Trump got 5% of the vote in San Francisco, Le Pen poles 5% in Paris. Look to the Rust Belts, the farm districts in both countries. There you will find unhappy campers, beset by falling incomes. The price of wine is down worldwide.
This is an overly one sided and unbalanced view of European politics. Traditionally, many on the European left as well as on the right have been Eurosceptics. Especially since the onerous fiscal conditions imposed on Greece, Eurosceptism on the left is once more on the rise, in the UK, France and elsewhere. This is even without considering the thorny issue of immigration.<br/><br/><a href="https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/14/left-reject-eu-greece-eurosceptic" title="https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/14/left-reject-eu-greece-eurosceptic" target="_blank">https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/14/left-reject-eu-gre...</a><br/><br/>I've been a passionate supporter of the concept of a United Europe since the '60s. Much good has been achieved by what was first the European Common Market that is now the EU.<br/><br/>Nevertheless, all human affairs move in cycles and the EU's time is coming to an end. We need a new Europe, one consisting of a loosely knit bloc of small sovereign states that reflect local identities rather than of the superstates of the 19th century. <br/><br/>For example, rather than the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (what the US media at all times insists upon calling 'Britain'), we need to return to the separate, distinct sovereign states of England, Wales, Scotland, the Shetlands, Ireland and Cornwall. In my view, the best working model for this new order is the Swiss model of independent cantons.
Thank God for Marine Le Pen.  I am an American citizen and also a proud member of the National Front. The FN is the leading European organization fighting for Western civilization and its people. There are others of course (e.g. Geert Wilders in Holland, Norbert Hofer in Austria), but the FN is the leader and Marine Le Pen has a good chance of winning the French presidential election. The rest of the political parties in France seem intent on turning the country into a Third World country populated with Third World people. Jean Raspail warned about this 40 years ago in his book ‘Camp of the Saints’ and Marine Le Pen is the only leader in France fighting against this. I encourage all of my fellow Americans (and anyone who loves Western civilization) to support her and become a member of the National Front.
On the final point of this essay, "matching the emotions of the nationalists," the author's side will always lose. Hearts don't flutter over the "European idea," whereas "the nation and the culture" truly move many people.  
I respectfully disagree. Portraying Trump and Brexit as the first dominoes in the rise of populism is a commonly repeated fallacy in British and American media. What we are seeing in the EU today is what has already happened in Flanders, which had its first major breakthrough of an extreme right party in 1991 (Vlaams Blok, later rebranded to Vlaams Belang) as a backlash against immigration. After over a decade of excluding that same extreme party from power (a policy called cordon sanitaire), which was counterproductive, a new party (N-VA) emerged with a mix of normal policy and identity politics which convinced the extreme voters. The extreme right Vlaams Belang is no longer of any significance in Flanders today.<br/>We are seeing the same today in the Netherlands, where acting prime minister Mark Rutte has "successfully" adopted identity politics (e.g. his "be normal or go away" to immigrants). Macron might succeed in fending off Le Pen by uniting all the anti-votes now but mainstream France will unfortunately also need identity politics to defeat her long term. The Democrats and Labour have still not figured it out... 
As long as Putin rules Russia and invades cyberspace around the world fomenting hatred, xenophobia, Islamophobia "populism" will persist. While conspiracy theories are largely sad attempts to connect dots where there are none, observing Putin's influence around the world is compelling and overlooked and replete with connected dots.<br/>Populism/nationalism, clamor for a "strong man" was promoted by Putin, the Koch's' Tea Party and their friends, Breitbart, FOX,  rushed to exploit the depressed post collapse terrorized population in America.<br/>Putin is busy at work throughout Europe and will not relent. Brexit/Farange/May/LePen are all of a piece that concludes with extremism and authoritarianism. Erosion and collapse of liberal democracy is the goal of the former KGB officer who wants the Russian Empire back. Putin will persist as long as he is not named and exposed and denounced. 
Dear Ms. McDonald-Gibson,<br/>Basically, what you and many other writers are telling us is that North America, Europe, Russia, China, etc., etc. learned NOTHING from World War One and World War Two, with narrow minded people blaming everyone but themselves for the problems they are generating.<br/>Well there IS something to be said for "consistency", isn't there?<br/>The line for "scapegoats" forms on the right, if you please.
Part of the so called populism is the issue of immigration. It is so hard to have a rational discussion on this, when terms like right and left are used. I suspect most people base their views on their own experiences. A friend's spouse was killed by an illegal immigrant. I suspect that impacts his views. My surgeon was from India and did a great job, that impacts one's views. Another friend runs a business and has Muslim immigrants come in and refuse to deal with female employees. He says, sorry, deal with them or go elsewhere. That impacts your views. At dinner the other night at a Mexican restaurant, the Mexican immigrants were impressively hard workers. That impacts your views. I suspect it is the same in Europe. You see good and bad. If you see more bad, you react in one direction, more good, another. Simple minded left and right commentary does little to shed light.
Even the most die hard supporters of the EU feel no emotional connection with "Europe". France, Germany and the rest of the Continent were an unholy mess in 1945, and the sudden affection for something called "Europe" was a reaction and response to what had gone before. Britain was in an entirely different position, and any emotional link was, and largely remains, with the Old Commonwealth and the East Coast of the United States, which share our language, history and culture. There is no more embarrassing sight than to see Australians, New Zealanders, Canadians, et al., whose recent ancestors fought and died for us, in long queues at immigration, while Germans, Italians, French, Dutch, Belgians, et al., whose recent forebears sought to eliminate us or threw away their weapons fairly smartly, niftily go through the fast lane. The Common Market, EEC, EU, or whatever brand name it adopts, has always been about economics and now includes immigration. Any politician or pundit uttering the sentimental and pretty meaningless twaddle of Macron would have been laughed off the stump over here.
The Times should stop using the term "populist". It suggest someone who tells people what they want to hear - and who tends to lie in the process. So this term de-legitimizes those movements. A better term would be non-establishment.<br/><br/>Gibson likes people like Macron and Klaver. I consider them empty suits. They represent the tendency on the left that started with Tony Blair: fielding relatively young smart and handsome men who radiate hope but who in fact are liberals who don't care about the traditional left economic issues.
Rutte was returned as leader of the biggest party in the Netherlands BECAUSE he showed understanding of the Dutch concern with immigration from Africa, not in spite of it.  After he did so, his party's fall stopped, and Wilder's rise reversed.<br/><br/>More European integration is needed, as is more LEGAL migration by educated, skilled foreigners, especially from Eastern Europe and Eastern and Southeast Asia.  But the Netherlands has gotten a big fiscal burden and a surge in crime from North African immigration, and as economic migrants  flow at higher rates from Africa, both north and south, and the Middle East, the problem will only grow greater.  Not all cultures or immigrants are equal; the job of government includes filtering them and saying no to some.
Emotions will always trump rational analysis in an election. No matter if you enroll an army of university professors to show their peer-reviewed analyses to prove the validity of your position on any given topic, it will always be the loudest, most charismatic "entertainer" in the room to capture the attention of the majority. In most modern democracies only a minority of people possess enough information, education, attention span and analytical ability to make fully informed decisions about complex economic, social and global policies. <br/><br/>One of the most telling comments I heard from a relative who was enthralled by Trump's speeches was that "he tells it like it is" - meaning, Trump's oversimplification of complex, multi-dimensional problems is the way to reach the majority of unsophisticated voters. These people are easily swayed by "charismatic figures" who simplify the complexity of the world to a level they can understand, no matter that such oversimplification can lead to awfully wrong conclusions about just about everything. <br/><br/>The world's liberals, intellectual thinkers and open-minded globalists need to smarten up and find their "Carl Sagan" charismatic figure to sell their vision to the masses, just as NASA did back in the '60s and '70s about the space exploration program.
Populism hasn't peaked, but the EU has.
Perhaps calming the emotions is a better way. Emotions may be one way to direct attention to an issue. But then it needs to be balanced with thoughtful learning and understanding. We are all capable of this. Leave the rabble-rousers to the dustbin of history. It is time for maturity to win out. But this means we should not downplay the real problems we need to confront -- and things like immigration/migrants/wars are not black and white issues. Learn to deal with complexity -- it is what reality is comprised of.
Economic troubles, a distant and out of touch authority in Brussels, and shoving immigrants who don't want to assimilate down people's throats have caused the rise of the New Right.<br/><br/>The powers that be in Europe may do enough about the latter two problems to satisfy a majority of voters, but the economic issues are in fact unsolvable. The single currency dooms the unproductive south of Europe to bondage at the hands of the productive north. So long as the euro lives, there is no way out of that situation. And that means poverty in the south, and resentment in the north at having to bail the south out. North and south must, eventually, separate.<br/><br/>A smaller union focused on northern Europe would be quite viable, even if France left. But its power and authority in the world would inevitably diminish. The question then becomes: does it lean toward Russia, or America? And that depends to a great degree on whether the foreign population can be integrated into Europe (and is willing to assimilate). If not, then Europe's natural ally in the struggle with Islam is Russia. The "Lisbon to Vladivostok" idea of Europe may win out, leaving America isolated and surrounded  by a hostile Europe-Russia grouping on one side, and a hostile China on the other.     
Traditional politicians, who ignore the sentiments behind populism, have little chance to win.  In the US an impulsive narcissist may have won because Hillary was  a very  bad candidate, but in Europe there are real reasons to be concerned about the negative effects of immigration and the balloon size of the Euro-Brussels bureaucracy. Francois Fillion lost in France because he did something that many other (French) politicians have been doing for years, but nowadays when things get talked about in the press and online, you do not get away with it anymore.<br/>Populist politicians play a role by waking up the other more traditional politicians. It is up to the latter to step up to the plate or lose their turn to play. 
From the panic that characterizes these anti Pen, various, commenters, Mme Le Pen has a better chance to win, than her numbers show.<br/><br/>How  do we say 'Brady effect' in French ?<br/><br/>=<br/>Somehow, the notion that people voting for national identity has become anathema, how does such a thing happen, that collective self-defense, implemented by pluralistic democracy,  in literate and educated countries,  is a moral crime, and how does it come as such a surprise, although bubble-ism and denialism, travel close together, fellow travelers<br/><br/>This is ALL Barack Obama's legacy, the rise of nationalism,  an unintended one, albeit welcome and beyond, didn't really take long to unravel the last eight years, at least to get started
Another simple-minded pro-globalization appeal to the tolerant among the population, those living in multi-cultural cities, working in the service industries, who visit immigrant enclaves as tourists. Not much to offer to those living in smaller towns or the countryside where an influx of refugees can be a real burden on social services. Also not addressing the corruption and neocolonial aspects of globalization. Shouting about how great it is to be tolerant isn't enough. Pro-global politicians have to shed their ties to big business and banking and produce positive results. 
Very good article, in particular in not only describing the problem but also outlining the possible solution.<br/><br/>However, I liked the illustration by Victor Kerlow even more. If dictionaries were illustrated, it would be perfect to describe "populism" - sometimes a picture really says more than a 1000 words.
I commend this essay's realism about the still-increasing strength of populism and anti-EU sentiments in Europe and how it can be countered.<br/><br/>European leaders however need to demonstrate not just the aspirational appeal of Europe's ideals, but also its practical benefits.<br/><br/>I think Macron is on to something when he talks about how the EU must be there to protect France and the French, and give them enough clout to defend their interests in a turbulent world.<br/><br/>I would now like to see some actual proposals being put on the table.
Who says populism has peaked? The French election is not at all a done deal. According to polls, the Front National's candidate is at about 40%, much higher then the 25% they mustered last time they made it into the runoff. <br/><br/>I would start to think about being optimistic when both France and Germany are done with their election and have returned solid centrist governments. Until then, all bets are off. 
The media bear a lot of responsibility for the rise of the populists, their outlandish statements make good press. The amount of coverage given to Trump by media, that disagreed with him, was free publicity. The same applies to Wilders, Le Pen et al. who get publicity way above their popularity, both at about 20% core vote in recent elections. In this era of industrial change, as traditional jobs go, a protest vote of 25-30% is to be expected.
Typical. The writer never once acknowledges the reasons Le Pen and other Euro-skeptic leaders are popular with ordinary people. She hopes her readers will forget the economic and social damage globalism has imposed upon millions of  citizens in western countries. She wishes to cast both patriotism and democracy in the most negative light possible, but for centuries citizenship has meant protection for millions, and their nationality is a source of community and JUSTIFIED pride. What the globalists want, though they seldom admit it, is an end to the nation state. Just like extremely wealthy John Lennon, they live in secure, well protected palaces and villas, far from the working class masses, where they "imagine there's no countries". 
Speaking of Merkel and others moving towards the nationalists and losing votes because of it, look what's happened to the European workers' parties. Britain's Labour and France's Socialists both adopted Neoliberal ideology and now neither commands even 20% of the vote.<br/><br/>Working people want a party that will represent their interests. If all the elite-led parties promote policies designed only to create higher profits for commerce and banking the workers will be left with nowhere to turn but to the anti-immigrant parties.
The fundamental problem in the populist revolts by people of European descent or European citizenry is the peoples' belief that the political and economic elites have abandoned the best interests of those citizens.<br/><br/>That's all.  It really has not that much to do with "right wing" and "left wing" political punditry.  Such labels are pretty meaningless in a world wherein communism is no longer a political ideology of governance but more a label for gangster governments.<br/><br/>There does not appear to be fascist or communist movements, at least as they were understood in 20th century historical context.  The rulers of today at both extremes are gangsters who are more concerned with their political power and financial self aggrandizement than with governance.<br/><br/>The populist issue in nations populated primarily by people of European descent is their rejection of immigrants from cultures antithetical to the secular cultures of the Europeans.  At least in Europe.  In America, the republican populist issue is contempt of the political class in general and the historic ethnic antipathy among secessionist wannabes towards non whites.  Neither has much to do with right wing and left wing politics.  Both are whipped up by politicians embrace and / or control of propaganda machines masquerading as news.<br/><br/>Time for the pundits to abandon the old labels and come up with something that more accurately reflects the partisanship dividing our people.
I read in the New York Times that Macron is the one who is going to reform the French economy and lessen protections for workers and unions, while Le Pen vows to maintain the French socialist system. <br/><br/>So who is far-right?   Economically, Macron is the rightist, and Le Pen is the leftist.   And the economy is probably the most important issue in this election.
"The biggest winners have been those leaders who embraced liberal, pro-European Union values with the same passion and emotion as the populists."<br/><br/>Let this sentence, the nut of Ms. McDonald-Gibson's excellent analysis of the state of European populism, be taken to heart here in the United States. <br/><br/>If the Democratic party can't whip up a level of excitement over its values of inclusiveness and economic fairness,  conveyed with passion and conviction, to win a significant number of seats in the House and the Senate, then this nation will be--to put it mildly--cooked.
Why is it that the bank controlled European Union is called the left and those upset about immigration is called the far right? I see this more as a labor problem. Merkel wanted to hold labor costs down perhaps and let in the immigrants, keeping the best ones and shining on the rest to other Euro members. A neat left right divide is not what I see. I see bank and war profiteer controlled European Union under duress from the hordes of refugees caused by the wars for energy and profit in the Middle East. Why do writers on these pages frame the issues in such a misleading way, playing on the emotions of out of work and very insecure populations? I suspect that such circumstances drives the voters into the arms even more securely of the powerful interests that caused their problems in the first place just like Americans did, voting for Trump. 
I am pro-European too.<br/><br/>The "EU" is not Europe.<br/><br/>It is because I love Europe that I want the "EU" to be dismantled.
Wrong.  Don't mistake the EU for the US chamber of commerce.  It isn't perfect by a long shot but it isn't entirely in the hands of big business lobbyists like the US.  There are strong social and cultural aspects of the EU that Americans could only dream of if they had half a mind.
The vast majority of refugees are fleeing from countries the West is destroying in the name of "make it cease." <br/><br/>Certainly some flee bad government, and certainly we should help ourselves by helping them better that. However, our current course of making it cease is in fact counterproductive in the extreme.
In your funky dreams.
Much distruction is possible (probable with Trump?) beforehand.  And I am less optimistic of the intelligence of the average human
"privilege since the dawn of time"? Wouldn't that be the Mesopotamians? 
"England has never been quite sure it wants to be in Europe"<br/><br/>The UK never wanted to be in the "EU" which is why Heath tricked us into joining by calling it the "Common Market."<br/><br/>Brexit was pre-programmed from the day we joined.<br/><br/>Be glad there was almost no violence.
Maybe you work every summer in the North or Southeast of France? It's like asking whites in the South if they like Trump and his Wall.
Brilliantly keeping those sanctions tight to offset any gain.  Genious
The UK is not like Turkey and I don't think many Brits want it to be.<br/><br/>Brexit is not about "populism".<br/><br/>It is about freeing the UK from a monster which is destroying Europe.
Populism is the opposite of elitism, that is rule by elites. These elites disappointed the majority as they could deliver the goodies only to themselves. <br/><br/>The elites need to change, the question is in what direction. The choice is enlightened capitalism and liberal democracy or extremism of either right or left.<br/>Currently, the elites have decided and voters followed to the right as elections in Poland, Hungary, UK and the United States demonstrate. On the other hand the right lost in the Netherlands and Austria.  
That is one definition of populism. But more thorough descriptions include the notion of a righteously aggrieved underclass rising up against entrenched and corrupt elites. Populism doesn't merely support "ordinary people." First, it defines who is "ordinary" and who is "elite." Then it sics them against one another.
I think you are using one of those ahistorical dictionaries in which words are given "true" meanings that virtually everyone but you misuses. Historically, populism IS right-wing extremism, nationalism, racism, jingoism, and xenophobia.
yes, this needs to be said....the media are making populism sound negative by identifying it with Trump and rw candidates in Europe. It really means egalitarian, instead of elitist. In the US where the financial elites fund elections and direct party policy, populism is the antidote to restore democracy. But it's being co opted and distorted.  
Funnily enough, this argument was also used against ratification of the Constitution and the creation of the United States. Had the "nationalist" leaders of each state had their way, there would be no country to be patriotic about. 
Thank you. As a liberal I do not support ideologies that diminish everyone who is not like me. Nor, as a liberal, do I deny free speech rights to disgusting people. We really need to take liberalism back from affluent college sophomores.
Plenty of Islamist intolerance running through every country where there is a sizeable Muslim population - witness the recent elections in Jakarta where the Christian mayor, or recent Turkish elections. And these are the so-called Moderate Muslim countries. 
If you have a daughter, I suggest she walk around by herself unveiled in a dress in Molenbeek or the suburbs of Paris. It might open your eyes
But did you notice how you slipped in the equivalence of "populism" and "popular opinion"? As if prejudice is somehow valid if the opinion is "popular". And as someone living in Europe, I can tell you that the rise of "popular" opinion against Muslims has nothing to do with Sharia or burqas and everything to do with the growing realization among middle-class Whites that the post War bubble has popped.
No just plain racist and KKK style white supremacists would describe your views of Muslims just fine. There is no campaign for Saudi style despotism By Muslims in Europe or America, and this despotism is itself kept ironically in power by US Cent Com. The real hatred and intolerance that threatens America comes from the same demographic which enslaved African Americans, committed genocide against Native Americans and ethnically cleansed Asian and Hispanic Americans and has yet to pay reparations. I will let you look in the mirror to figure out which non Native American demographic I am referring to.
"Lowell" writes, "The media has allowed politicians who are anything but populist to hijack Populism for their own ends."<br/><br/>One common meaning of the term is indeed negative. As in, for instance, "telling lies, making impossible promises, and pretending to be what a candidate is not, all in order to obtain the votes of the common man or woman."<br/><br/>President Trump told his working class voters many things, but has changed his mind on most of them. Instead he has implemented policies that take away services and money from the working class and provide tax cuts and other benefits to the rich. <br/><br/>Senator Sanders blamed the hardships of the common man or woman on global trade. This appealed to the widespread notion that our problems are caused by foreigners. But it is not correct. The largest cause was automation. <br/><br/>The negative sense of the term is more common because there are so many more examples of it. 
Thr Brexit folks are not fascist.<br/><br/>The people who forced the Lisbon Treaty on us without the referendum we were promised when about 82% wanted that referendum and 70% wanted to vote NO!!, they are fascists.
Sorry for bringing civilization to savage peoples. 
The Nazis were no more socialists than the People's Republic of China is a republic, representing the interests of its people. Anyone can call themselves anything; it doesn't make it true. 
Unity for unity's sake without values that are intelligent and humane would be merely an amorphous monster.  "Collective consciousness" is beyond the beyond: it won't come until the after-life.
"Populism" is support for the concerns of ordinary people and policies/politicians advocating this. <br/><br/>Populism is NOT right-wing extremism, nationalism, racism, jingoism, xenophobia and/or financial irresponsibility!" (See Vox, NYC above)<br/>Populism is a word being misused by the media to further their agenda. It is a dimension of democracy, duh.
BKC, sorry to disappoint you. When the author talks of populism, she is referring to the broad mass of citizens, not the far-right. Yours is a  prime example of the liberal   elite (not the left-wing, note - many of the left-wing are in the Le Pen camp) trying to impose their opinions on the masses.
The media and journalists will continue to misuse the word "populism" because it serves their left-wing agenda to do so.  Populists take power away from elitists, and the press is certainly elitist.
No offense, but Nationalism to Fascism is not a "time-honored sport" restricted to Europeans. 
Complete nonsense. Nations in the modern sense didn't exist in Europe till the very late Middle Ages (before that, "nation" meant something like "tribe").  Nationalism as a concept didn't exist until after Napoleon.  Fascism as an ideology didn't exist till after the First World War.  If you mean that European nations (like all others, by the way) have periodically gravitated toward illiberal poles, then say that.
The American populists you are lionizing included many Nativists and racists...especially in the American south. Populism has always been representative of the values of blue collar workers, dirt farmers, and other folks who are being exploited by the rich. Their political views were often emotional and non-ideological. The Dixiecrats who were the backbone of the Democratic Party for decades (until Nixon's Southern Strategy brought them into the Republican Party) included all the famous segregationists of the first two thirds of the 20th century.
I'm not lionizing the 19th Century populists.  I'm merely saying that their focus was on agrarian concerns, particularly of the small farmer, as opposed to the plantation owners who went right on after the Civil War.  They wanted price supports and an expansion of the money supply to create inflation.  Racism and bigotry were secondary.<br/><br/>Back then, inflation (though the term hadn't been coined for this use) was not seen as the evil it is now.  Recession or "Panics" were  far more typical.  Inflation was seen as a way to get farm prices up and stimulate the economy.  This is STILL true, that if you expand the money supply you get growth as long as inflation doesn't get out of control.<br/>While Keynes hadn't been writing then, that WAS the justification for pushing for bimetalism, Gold and Silver, rather than just gold, which is far more scarce and therefore recessionary.<br/><br/>The Populists were a uniquely American party and only tangentially similar to the European and modern American "populists" who are nothing of the kind. Lumping them in with modern "populists" is simply bad history.
If the Liberals of the EU lose, that will likely push the Communists to the front burner, not the back. In the first round in France, they only missed out on the runoff by 3%.
There has been a murder in Georgia for one who spoke for Trump,
Visit Dearborn, Michigan, Mr. Harrison.  Your statement may well require some significant revisions.
The German government (Merkel) made a huge mistake thinking they could allow a few desperate Syrian refugees to come to Germany and get automatic asylum. Stupidly, they did not assume that the herd of illegal migrants, job seekers, welfare shoppers would throw away their IDs and lie about their origins, saying they were Syrian.  Of this horde that walked into Germany (over 1 million), 70% were found to be NOT Syrian. They lied about it. They were Afghans (the worst liars) and Pakis, and North Africans. And they will continue to lie to get whatever welfare check they can scam out of this. That is the reality.  And you want to live togethor with such people? This "integration" is pure nonsense. German taxpayers will be paying for most of these people until they die. 
If "liberal" means "freedom", then why is it that the "liberal" is unable to listen and respond civilly to those who have opposing views?<br/><br/>It is this elitism that has the liberal looking for why there is a "populist" movement that is eating their lunch and reducing them to irrelevancy in the halls of governance.
Are you arguing, tc, for more Planned Parenthood facilities in Muslim enclaves?
Sorry-- unable to listen and respond civilly, compared to whom?
"Perhaps there is a rate at which unfamiliar social customs and values can be comfortably accommodated?"<br/>Why should they be accommodated at all?   If immigrants don't want to assimilate into the dominate culture of their chosen new home they should stay in their home country.  This goes double for people immigrating from parts of the world like the Middle East where the dominate social customs and values are wholly incompatible with Western social customs and values.  No individual has the right to show up in another country and demand that country bend over backwards for them.
Nationalism in the late 18th and early 19th Centuries started as a liberal force for good. It was the move for citizenship, for ordinary people to govern themselves rather than feudal aristocrats running countries as their private property. Countries were to be the nations of their people, not the property of their elites.<br/><br/>That became twisted by the late 19th Century. Arguably Napoleon began the twist almost as soon as nationalism arose, however it was still a purer nationalism that motivated Germans to defeat Napoleon, and motivated unification of Italy, and much else. <br/><br/>By the 20th Century, it had become wholly corrupted into a tool of militarism.<br/><br/>We still need the positives of what nationalism originally brought. We need to be rid of the negatives for which it came to be used later.<br/><br/>We need a clear view of our problem -- it is not just nationalism, it is the manipulation of it for hatreds and war.<br/><br/>The positives of nationalism are still the basis of thinking for a state to care for all of its people. It is the basis for national concern for health care, and an economy that serves everyone.<br/><br/>We have a baby in the bathwater problem, in which the bathwater is using the baby as an excuse to abuse us.
The fact is, only the Red Army put a stop to Hitler. That's how it happened.
And it isn't only a matter of numbers by any means, but a matter of how many people within what time frame, and with what institutions to receive them?<br/><br/>Who bears the costs, who reaps the benefits? This is now the question for every issue.
There is also the concept that the able bodied and health males (and women) can stay where they are fight for and win their freedom and liberty. Afterall isnt that what the West did time and time again amongst itself...   is our god fortune built on bedrock of sacrifce and fight...
By allowing endless immigrants into the US/Europe we are destroying our planet. 
Excuse me, but wealth continues to be redistributed from poor to rich countries--not the other way around--by the neoliberal policies of the "ruling elite."  Just as it is being redistributed from poor to rich in your own country.  And you live in Berkeley? Time to wake up and read a book.  
I do not know why you say "everyone agrees that it's not a great choice of candidates for the French." Many French people I know are thrilled by the surge of support for Macron, who came out of nowhere to vault into the front-runner. It is the first time in decades that there has been a Centrist in the 2nd round. And of course, there are 1 in 5 who are thrilled about the FN.<br/><br/>The vast majority of French people are republicans, that is, believers in the traditional French republican values of Liberty Equality and Brotherhood. To even pretend for a moment that Le Pen represents their identity as French is sheer ignorance. The FN is anti-republican, which is why so many right-wing French leaders (Sarkozy, Juppe, Fillon) have come out in open support of Macron. 
The real problem is that in this star-struck, entertainment-driven society, Americans don't know where, and how to draw the line between phantasy and fact.<br/>As Neil Postman brilliantly points out in his seminal work:<br/>Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business: "Americans no longer talk to each other, they entertain each other.<br/>They do not exchange ideas, they exchange images.<br/>They do not argue with proposistions, they argue with good looks, celebrities and commercials."<br/>No way to argue that fact --we have living proof of it in the White House.
I fully agree, Mr. Harris, that the German banks, indeed all of the banks involved in lending money to the Greeks, should have been held more responsible,<br/><br/>But we also need to understand that the Greeks, and by extension, other governments who engaged in borrowing for their operating funds, need to pay for their own serious mistake of spending money that they could never in hundreds of years have paid back.<br/><br/>Balance is the concept that needs to hold sway, and there needs to be robust discussion as to where that balance may actually be found.  So far, that balance hasn't been achieved, and the participants are continuing to walk the fine line between success and failure.<br/><br/>Can the EU, as an organization, manage these matters?  <br/><br/>As far as I can tell, the limit of the effectiveness of the bureaucrat has been exceeded, and The People are again reasserting their authority throughout the EU's member nations.
"The problem for the EU is the inordinate power of Germany within it."<br/><br/>I believe that that is not the problem but a problem.<br/><br/>Bavaria is only part of Germany because Ludwig II was bribed by Bismark.  The beautiful castle of Neuschwanstein was the bribe.<br/><br/>Bavaria in the Federal Republic is like Britain in the "EU".  <br/><br/>It gets ripped off.  It pays in more than it gets out.  In return it gets abuse.<br/><br/>I suggest that Bavaria should leave the Federal Republic.  It is large enough to be an independent state.  It could and should continue to be part of NATO.<br/><br/>It would probably stay in the "EU", which I would consider to be a mistake.<br/><br/>Bavaria leaving the Federal Republic would reduce the power of Berlin for the benefit of other European countreies and for the benefit of the Germans.
"In Germany - like the Netherlands - economy is robust."<br/><br/>I live in Germnany and many Germans do not see it like that.  There are a number of reports of many Germans living below the poverty line etc.
And the "EU"-fanatics use that strategy because they haven't got any real arguments.<br/><br/>Their arguments do not stand up to any sort of examination.
In reply to "RC" who writes, " 'Populism': derogatory term for democracy, used when democratic outcomes don't agree with the user's ideology."<br/><br/>One common meaning of the term is indeed negative. As in, for instance, "telling lies, making impossible promises, and pretending to be what a candidate is not, all in order to obtain the votes of the common man or woman."<br/><br/>President Trump told his working class voters many things, but has changed his mind on most of them. Instead he has implemented policies that take away services and money from the working class and provide tax cuts and other benefits to the rich. <br/><br/>Senator Sanders blamed the hardships of the common man or woman on global trade. This appealed to the widespread notion that our problems are caused by foreigners. But it is not correct. The largest cause was automation. <br/><br/>The negative sense of the term is common because there are so many more examples of it.  
Modern man, aka homo sapiens (that is: us), has roamed the Earth for 200.000 years. We have the exact same biology, brain volume and primitive urgest &amp; instincts as the Greek, the Romans, the Vandals, the Goths, the Vikings. The Middle Ages, with all their violence, are only 0.003 part of homo sapiens's existence ago. In the last 0.0005 part of that period, mankind waged two World Wars wiping out each others brethren by the millions, and helped to install dictators who were allowed to kill more millions.<br/><br/>To me, there is no shadow of a doubt that 'civilization' is a thin layer of chrome on a body of hot and rough iron. <br/><br/>And rust never sleeps.
She is the only one who will liberate France from the strangleholds of the Eurozone and the "EU".<br/><br/>I am looking forward to visiting France when she is President.
IOW: "You win by appealing to EMOTIONS rather than REASON." Not to mention by having some votes worth 3.8X VS others and having an Electoral College that completely screws up voting where TRUMP gets in with 2.8 million LESS THAN 50% of the popular vote and still wins! The EC needs to be dismantled as they did not save us as they were designed to do to save us from having an CHILD president.
"But why should traditionally homogeneous cultures be branded as part of the right if they complain about being inundated by refugees of a very different cultural heritage?" Because we Germans never were that homogeneous! Here in Europe we always had people wandering around, and the languages reflect that. The whole continent is a roiling melting pot, if you look at it over span of some centuries, and the newbies we Germans got 2015 will surely not manage to "overthrow our culture" or whatever else the fear-monger claim. There came about one million people. We are over 80 million. So, particularly here in Berlin I can safely say "we are the borg, you will be assimilated". :P 
I just don't see it as all Democrats fault. Don't you think that the neo liberal consensus whose two big political champions are Thatcher and Reagan has some connection to Republicans too. 
The same thing could be said about the United States. Globalization has lifted many out of poverty across the globe, but the promoters of neoliberalism have been slow to recognize that their great projects have had victims, victims that go to the polls.
Including right here in America.
Many leftist are voting for Le Pen. The leftist candidate Melenchon (the Bernie) had economic ideas that were similar to Le Pens (the Trump) and so many are voting for her like many Sanders supporters who voted for Trump because the far-right economic policys and the far- left economic policys aren't that different. The far-left candidate will also probably depress turn-out which would hurt the level-headed Macron (the Clinton) and  help Le Pen.
I question the far right's need or desire to promote self-annihilation.
Clearly we need a self-hating right instead of a right that only does self love. 
Even after the economic crash in 2009, no one was discussing the dissolution of the EU. In fact, it was just stupid lazy Greece's fault, and those Greeks had to suffer, suck it up and stay in the Union. It's really been since Merkel announced a "y'all come (and then most of you must go to other EU countries at Germany's behest)" that break up talk is really happening. 
Republicans look for Reagan to return; Democrats, FDR. He was your people's billionaire.
No one can withstand the insatiable click count metric. All reason and talent falls before the mighty balance sheet.
But now you have a President who has more power than a British monarch and was not elected by the majority of the people.<br/><br/>Repent!
Lol! Erm...no. The far- left and the far-right are basically the same when it comes to economics. For proof see the similarities between Le Pen and Melenchon or Bernie and Trump.  Also, being opposed to international trade is just stupid. It's not "globalism," it's what's been going on for centuries and the only people who were traditionally opposed to it was the far left and communists.
Globalists have fused Europe into a reasonably effective European Union of nation states, though one that could be improved in a lot of ways. Prior to that, Europeans did nothing other than fight with each other. Conflict can be considered the default condition of Europe and the EU has helped to stop much of it.<br/><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_conflicts_in_Europe" title="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_conflicts_in_Europe" target="_blank">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_conflicts_in_Europe</a>
I think if you study a little history you will discover that the neo liberal economic program which promotes globalism in the name of market efficiency and that will supposedly help us all is not from the left but from the conservative ( not radical) right. We are living the program supported by those two political icons of the right Reagan and Thatcher hardly leftists. 
The TImes, as its readers point out, does not know the difference between a demagogue and populist.
The media has a negative tone re populism. But populism is what the American revolution against the King George was about. Now, some paint it as the mob rising up to defy law and order.<br/>What's confusing to the public is populist Trump says he'll bring jobs back. But he's very pro corporate. And in Europe even the right wing parties are pro their  universal health care. Here, that is painted as so left wing, it's off the table for discussion by politicians, who have to listen to their insurance mega donors. 
If you want to 'wait for bigotry to die off' in The Netherlands, please don't hold your breath. Last March, Wilders got the vote of only 6% of people aged 65+, while 8% of all people 18-35 voted for him. Presently Wilders is 25% more popular among the young than among the elderly.<br/><br/>I am not sure that I agree with your use of the word 'bigotry'. Surely, Wilders is radical in his views on islam, on the EU, and on the problems associated with mass immigration. But he is not a racist, nor a racial hate mongerer. I don't like him, too; but there is ample reason to at least try to understand why common, not stupid, not bigoted people, turn to Wilders.
I share your frustration at the loose use of this term. One way to think about it is this: populism is not an ideology, it's a *style* of politics that encompasses many things but its basic premise is that it pits "the people" against "the establishment." <br/><br/>It can be from the left, in which case it's usually purely class-based (think Bernie Sanders, or go back to Huey Long!) or it can be from the right in which case it's got a class component but also a xenophobic one that blames not only the elites, but also foreigners/minorities etc. <br/><br/>That is to say, different so-called "populist" movements define who is "the people" and who is "establishment" differently, but that central, vigorous antagonism is always there and it always arises when there is either inequality or a sense of national humiliation. Sometimes it's absorbed into the existing parties (as FDR did with HUey Long) and sometimes it overcomes them and becomes hideously authoritarian (interwar Europe.)<br/><br/>I hope that helps. John Judis' recent book on the subject is very good -- though it inexplicably omits interwar fascism from the typology in a way that makes little sense. 
The French do not have the stupidity of the electoral college. 
Le Pen, and her party + leadership is under heavy imbessling charges. Many of the top members are Nazi affiliated. She is not a leader, she is just another populist divider of people. 
I like the nuanced, rational tone of your post in the midst of so many convoluted and opinionated replies to this piece.
If only that were true. Neo-Nazis all across Europe have racialist ideas which the act upon in their support of extreme right parties. And sad to say, America is filled with white supremacists, supporters of the Confederacy, and ordinary racists who fill the ranks of the anti-immigration movement in America. 
We must start to agree that immigration does not benefit the average citizen.<br/>Also that there are bad immigrants, ones who want to murder us.
Ahem, cough, Sanders, cough.
You're right about the need to simplify the message so those with limited education can understand it.  So here's my recommendation for the Democrats message in 2018: <br/><br/>Universal health care now -- because no other policy matters to you if you're dead.  You don't need a job if you're dead.  You don't need an education if you're dead.  You don't need defense, infrastructure, or energy if you're dead.  You don't care about gun rights or gay rights if you're dead.  Being alive is a prerequisite for benefiting from anything else.  So health care for every American first.
Barrack "Dont Call me Barry" Obama gave lip-service to "Change".<br/>"Change you can believe in" was observed to be more like Marie Antoinette's statement about the common folk...."Let them eat Cake".<br/>Possibly with similar results.
And we should give credence to this comment when you can't even master the correct spelling of Barack Obama's name?<br/>Oh please. Just wait until your healthcare disappears and taxes go up on the "common folk" to fund the ultra-wealthy.<br/>Get ready to eat cake.
@mijosc<br/>All true but the sequence is different, globalization was set free by politicians, e.g. Pres. Clinton who were advocates of Free Trade as a component of Free Markets pushed by the neo-liberalism set in motion by Milton Friedman, Friedrich Hayek, and Ludwig von Mises. No consideration was give to the employment effect beyond David Ricaro’s classic 19th C. argument of comparative advantage. Those forces intensified the developing Inequality. Neo-Liberalism was not uniquely American, Europe followed suite.<br/>But yes the business elite loved its financial effects.
I'm curious: which countryside are you, writing from Brooklyn, referring to where the influx of refugees is so intolerable? It is not true that regions where the parties of the extreme right are strongest are disproportionately affected by immigration and refugee settlement, to the contrary, and what do you think makes the cities multi-cultural, if not immigration?
I have to agree to an extent but it is not globalisation per se that is at fault but the inability of the left to foresee that globalisation was inevitably going to strengthen the strong and weaken the weak  -- even though it has pulled the millions out of absolute poverty.  This failure to intervene in the "free" market has produced a not so "free" market giving economic power to the most powerful and with it political power. Pro-global politicians must not only shed their ties with big business and big banks, they must act to reduce that concentration of economic and political power.
You'll wait a long time for Macron to put any solid proposals on the table. Most of his ideas have already been rejected by the French Assembly. Like Clinton, the only thing he can "promise" is more pseudo-socialist garbage and idiotic phrases.  He has been Hollande's Economics minster for the past four years, so nothing is new.  And Macron has NO members of his party in Parliament.  His vacuous appeals for "open borders and tolerance"  come at a pretty inopportune time...more than 240 French people have been murdered the past few years by muslims who have been "tolerated" by European society for too long. Macron is not the answer.  He is looking for anything to differentiate himself from LePen, I understand, but spouting this "love all illegal immigrants" garbage is not the way to do it.  
David, I see you live in Brussels, and assume, rightly or wrongly, that you have a personal interest in supporting the Bureaucracy of the EU which autocraticly imposes all those regulations and "open borders" and "quality standards for regional cheeses", etc, etc.<br/>The EU does NOT represent the so-called "people".....the EU structure is built on the "Divine Right of Bankers" to rule the land.<br/>Greece dug in its heels in an odd, corrupt way to protest the arbitrary rule of Bankers.<br/>Britain, thank god, did the English Thing....and simply ignored those silly bureaucrats in Brussels and went back to the practical stiff upper lip English way of mismanaging a country.  The Brits have their own Bankers....they dont need a Banker appointed by the Pope(or whom-ever).<br/>And now France may roll out the guillotine for the Bankers.<br/>the word from Brussels...."Let them eat cake".
If the economic and social pressure on average people does not lift under moderate governments, those moderate governments will eventually be replaced, after much strife, with immoderate ones.  It is far too soon to tell whether this era of populist sentiment will end with the re-election of Chancellor Merkel and the election of Mr. Macron.  Far too early.
The writer called "me from Earth" takes a sound argument and wrecks it by invoking the late John Lennon, who imagined a better world but was gunned down in the one we actually have. 
@Green Tea<br/>Yes working people want a party to support their interest but both the social democrats and the conservatives have drank the neo-liberal cool-aid and lost their way for any but the ‘successful.’ The American equivalent is easy to find and thus an unlabeled Hope gets elected only to show the extreme of the previous put in motion. This story is far from over.
Another source of European Angst.......its overpopulated already.  Doesnt have room for more "refugees" escaping an equally overpopulated and stressed out MidEast.
Le Pen might appear to hold left-wing economic policies but it is all smoke and mirrors! The future of the unity of the European peoples is far more important than the proto-socialist economic garbage spouted by Le Pen and her ilk. Anyone with a shred of understanding of how the globalized world works knows that protectionism, retrenchment, border tariffs, walls, nationalism and divisiveness between nations will NOT bring back any jobs for the middle classes, not in France and not anywhere in the developed world! <br/><br/>Le Pen and her LIES will bring France to its knees and destroy the united Europe that has kept peace and prosperity for 70 years, bringing back the rotten corpse of fascism and racism to the continent. <br/><br/>Most young people in Europe feel united across borders with their peers, and they do not share Le Pen's toxic nationalism nor her desire to turn the clock back 70 years! The less educated middle classes who feel left out would better stop moaning, adapt to change and ensure that their kids get a good education and develop open minds in a global planet. The era of national borders and close-mindedness is FINISHED, you won't bring the past back by voting fascists in power.
Macron is not a leftist. He is a centrist.<br/><br/>Le Pen is not in the least leftist. Do not confuse National Socialism with socialism. There was nothing socialist about the Nazis, and there is nothing left-wing about Le Pen.
The rise of the 'far-right' is indeed misunderstood. The factual truth is that theses left-right distinctions are becoming, especially in France, quite irrelevant. The real new distinction is between globalists-progressists who embrace Europe and global trade with liberal views such as Macron's, and the nationalist-protectionists who can be found in the far-right (Lepen,Dupont) as well as in the left (Melenchon,NPA) and who represent about 50% of the votes.<br/>The real threat is to see a new kind of party that as did the National Socialist Party in the 30s, manages to unite these groups, and the real opportunity for Macron and Democracy is that these 2 parts still hesitate to vote together. For how long ?
Bravo!
And how would you explain the last election. The Democrats have been Republican-lite for years and need to find their way back, or as you imply just hope anti-Trump is enough?
The Democratic party is over.  Too bad Bernie had to play along with them before and even after being betrayed by them.  
The politicians who created the EU were able to do so because they had some appeals to all sides.<br/><br/>The European Coal and Steel community with which they started had an obvious appeal to the industrial interests that had been a mainstay of the right. <br/><br/>Yet is was also part of a dream of solidarity and unity to prevent war and protect workers that appealed to the left. <br/><br/>The project was first posited and championed on the left in France, "The ECSC was first proposed by French foreign minister Robert Schuman on 9 May 1950 as a way to prevent further war between France and Germany. He declared his aim was to "make war not only unthinkable but materially impossible"" <br/><br/>Also, "Jean Monnet was a French political economist and diplomat. An influential supporter of European unity, he is considered as one of the founding fathers of the European Union. Jean Monnet has been called “The Father of Europe” by those who see his innovative and pioneering efforts in the 1950s as the key to establishing the European Coal and Steel Community, the predecessor of today’s European Union." <br/><br/>Yet his plan was as much rightist as leftist. "In 1945, Monnet proposed the Monnet Plan. It included taking control of the remaining German coal-producing areas and redirecting the production away from the German industry and into the French, thus permanently weakening Germany and raising the French economy considerably above its pre-war levels. The plan was adopted by Charles de Gaulle in early 1946."
When did you last travel in Europe? Where do you get your fantasies - war profiteer controlled EU? I really do despair of many of the contributors of replies. I expect cogent,informed and rational arguments from Times readers not the bizarre ramblings of Fox and Breitbart followers. Good luck with 45.
Finally a comment that makes sense.  Bravo. <br/><br/>As to:  "Why do writers on these pages frame the issues in such a misleading way?"  They do it for the interests of the very same banks and war profiteers.  
Over his 8yrs there were plenty of bailouts and then talk of 'getting tough on wallstreet" via Dodd Frank...which of course only saw the banks larger, richer and more consolidated than they were before pre 2008.  Not even a whisper of breaking up these massive banks. Sadly, now we know why. So disgusting.
Who care about what "image" Obama is presenting in accepting $400k for Wall Street speeches. <br/><br/>"Optics"? Who cares. I'm concerned about substance.<br/><br/>The Democrats systematically take the interests of Wall St and the 1% over that of the middle and working class. Every time. This is symbolic of that effort, on the part of the Democrats, to exclude working people from the conversation. 
Please, can we leave silly personal attacks on Obama to the right leaning press, instead of doing it ourselves?  Money in our society, like it or not, is power, and if somebody is profligate enough to give 400,000 dollars worth of power to Obama in exchange for listening for an hour to his opinions, I call it a win/win: A: I prefer that money be in his hands rather than Wall Street hands, and B: it may be the only thing those guys hear in the week he speaks to them that hasn't been written by a right-wing apologist.  Hold the self-righteous scolding, unless and until he suddenly changes his opinions to favor the other  side.
Romney had an underground garage for his cars and the current POTUS lives in a house lined with gold and sits in chairs straight out of the Versailles collection but the Democrats are out of touch with the  "common man"?! Stop it.
Shame on you for being so prematurely judgmental.  You are critical before you know A) what he will say or B) what he will do with his fee.  Not that either of these are anyone's business.  But has it occurred to you that he may plan to take this opportunity to point out some of the benefits of keeping people healthy, and ways that capitalism can work for the common good?  Or that he may be donating his fee to charity?  Have you still not realized that this man is not typical?  
Looks like Obama finally has his legacy: an obscenely greedy, immoral money-grubbing 1%er
I have zero problems with Obama making as much money as he can.  It's called capitalism and I know that's hard for liberals to understand.  He has every right to give that speech--and if others want to pay him to give s speech so be it.  More power to him<br/><br/>My only question is why on earth would someone want to spend even ten minutes of their time listening to him speak!<br/><br/>Next topic please
Why is this your business?  This is America.  He can do what he wants.  Obama served the country well.  Now it is time for you to mind your own business.
Expecting a 55 year old former president to refuse compensation for the remainder of his life so that you feel better is absurd.  He will never run for political office again, and Michelle has indicated that she will not run.  Neither of them are slaves to white liberals, and can make legal choices to make them wealthy as they see fit, the same that previous (and future) white presidents made without complaint.  <br/><br/>Who cares what Bush makes per speech?  No one thought that they owned him after he left the presidency in 2009, and had any right to dictate his life choices.  If you don't like his speeches, don't go.  If Obama never took a dime again, it wouldn't move a single vote of those who always hated him anyway.  
Sadly I agree with every word in your editorial ... 
Aloha,<br/>Did you ask Barack Obama how he will use the money?   Or perhaps that is too invasive?     Perhaps he will fund his new foundation.   You reported "The Obamas are starting a foundation whose work will include “training and elevating a new generation of political leaders in America.”"   Maybe he will give the money to Planned Parenthood or to school lunch programs?    If so, would you still be so judgemental?
you don't have to be poor to speak for and champion the poor.
You want to talk about bad optics?  This is bad optics: The New York Times applying a different standard to President Obama than they have for any other former president.  For myself and many other black people those optics reek.
Two questions for the New York Times Editorial Board:<br/><br/>(1) Now that President Obama is a private citizen who will never again be seeking public office, why is it the business of the Editorial Board -- or anybody else for that matter -- what the man is paid for a speaking engagement?<br/><br/>and<br/><br/>(2) Which members of the Editorial Board would decline such a fee if offered (assuming they could command it, that is)?
For a newspaper who has gotten so much wrong this past year &amp; (sadly) shown so little influence your begrudging the Obamas their financial ascent seems petty &amp; backward thinking.  Why do they have to sacrifice when the Sulzbergers &amp; the Ochs and others continue to reap the rewards of capitalism?<br/>It may not be a perfect system, but it's the only one we've got. Let these people finally make the money they deserve.  Really, there's nothing wrong with it.
Reading your excellent editorial " The Cost of Barak Obama's Speech" may I say "Mr Obama you too ?" Did not know you are a greedy person.<br/>Far away from the shores of Atlantic a person double the age of yours  was amazed when you declared your intention to run for the Presidency of the US. Day up to day I watched your growing tall and taller. You became the President of the US and created History.<br/>I watched you brought grace and decency to the office  of the President and the White House. During your tenure you tried in your own way to pursue peace and dialogues around the world. Your visit to Cuba, your efforts to make peace with even those whom you did not see as friends will be remembered by decent people around the world. They all will see you as a decent person and president and will look forward to seeing you contributing your Post President efforts for creating a better world for your daughters and their friends.<br/>But I must say I did not want to see you as a greedy person like Hilary Clinton. How could you agree to deliver  speech for US $ 400, 000 to Wall Street. You should speak for the people of the US and the world as a statesman and not to those who want to purchase you for influence and more profit.<br/>Invite you to visit Bangladesh but cant pay you fees.<br/>Urge you stand up for a better world and unite your people and the our world.
After all the man endured during his two terms as President, for the New York Times to go after him, when he is a private citizen and not seeking public office, about a speaking fee his hosts could well afford to pay, is simply unconscionably petty!
Let's see what he does with his money before we all turn into socialists. 
Oh please.  Give me a break, NYT.  The guy served this country with honor and integrity. He got us through 8 very difficult years.  You have the world's biggest doffus in the Presidency now, costing the tax payers millions, finally admitting the job is "hard" and you go after a past President for making some money for lectures?  I'm with Trevor Noah on this one. 
How DARE he be black while doing what innumerable politicians and luminaries have done before him?
Reading the most popular comments to this editorial, it's disappointing to see how many Democrats are willing to ignore Obama's inconsistent behavior (read "hypocrisy") on money and politics. Obama doesn't need this money. He's got a $65 million book deal. He's a leader, and he can afford to send a message here. If he won't, who will? <br/><br/>Everyone who voted for Trump and Sanders is going to look at Obama's behavior and conclude that Democrats are no different from Republicans when it comes to Wall Street. How does that help Democrats win elections? How does it help get money out of politics? This speech is going to cost Democrats a lot of votes.
As a Democrat, I completely disagree with the NYT editorial board. I don't see why there should be some sort of liberal litmus test that denies capitalistic instincts. In fact, I always thought conservative attacks on the Clintons for what they commanded at certain events was unfounded and hypocritical. If the market values an Obama or Clinton or Bush speech at a million dollars, than so be it. Anyone who rises to a level of high office will command significant money after leaving it. One could argue that some of the money earned should be set aside for charity, or a certain number of speeches should be given pro bono, as at a commencement address. Otherwise, I don't think Obama is out there to set some kind of example by declining money for publishing or speaking at planned events. Don't forget that Obama's success was largely due to his understanding of community organizing to get donations at the grassroots level. Hillary was overly driven by corporate entanglements, which made her ground game less effective than Obama's. So there is plenty about Obama to be admired in his ability to organize and energize a base which elected him and is till interested in what he has to say.
So why are speaking fees more dishonorable than getting tens of millions for writing a book? Will the earnings from the book only be ethical if lower and middle income people buy it and read it, or can wealthy and upper income people get something from it too? 
Because he too needs to make a living, send his daughters to college, save for old age and make a difference to the world while enjoying the pleasures of a modern life. 
To me this is a non-issue. I don't get all this haughty moral outrage about high speaking fees, first for Hillary Clinton and now for Obama. Neither case appears to involve a quid pro quo. (It wasn't Clinton who wanted to dismantle Dodd-Frank, for God's sake, it was her opponent! Who's now trying to do it.)<br/><br/>Let's grant that the way our culture assigns monetary rewards is totally out of whack: athletes, rock stars, and Kardashians all make absurd amounts of money because that's what the market dictates, i.e. because they can, while critically important people like schoolteachers are paid abysmally. I'd like to see some serious attention paid to reducing income inequality in general. But given that this is the world we live in right now, there's something hypocritical about making a big deal of someone famous getting paid a lot for an appearance in the case of Obama or Clinton but not all the others.
Since so many bloggers are playing the race card to defend Barack Obama's decision to accept a huge speaking fee before the Wall Street movers and shakers I'm going to pull out the gender card.  Did it ever occur to anyone that all the criticism that was directed at  Hillary Clinton's taking a big check in exchange for giving a speech to all of  those Goldman Sachs executives has deep sexist roots?  There's still a lot of  lingering resentment  over everything Hillary Clinton says or does from the time she was First Lady.  I remember all the dismissive sneering of Hillary Clinton  as "Co-President Clinton."  I'd like to remind everyone that it was Barack Obama who played spoiler and ruined Hillary Clinton's first presidential run back in 2008.  I remember the manufactured outrage over Hillary Clinton's speaking fees and the persistent demands to see her transcripts long after she had left government service from holier than thou progressives. <br/><br/>Now those very same progressives are cheering Barack Obama for commanding exorbitant fees as he hits the post presidential speakers tour.  Hey maybe capitalism isn't so bad after all!!  Isn't the progressives who are willing to shell out over $1000 for a ticket to Hamilton, a musical about the father of American capitalism.
I think it would be more meaningful than the current discussion to see what President Obama does with his speaking fees. I do not suggest they are public monies, but is he not likely to do some good in the world with them, and might commentary be withheld until that is determined to be the case or not?
Mr. Obama didn't swindle or trick anyone into paying him the money. I don't understand where the question of morality comes in? Money was willingly offered for a service, and was willingly accepted. Mr. Obama never said he won't speak on any platform unless handsomely rewarded. I'm sure, if asked, he would be happy to speak for free (or reduced fee) for a good cause. <br/><br/>Who amongst us would feel any moral dilemma in accepting good money for a set of qualifications we worked hard to accomplish from the country's richest people? 
Hid my passport until the last moment before his election, afterward for a loge time proud to flash it in the long line through visa check; then by 2010 back in the pocket.<br/>It was clear from the staff he choose or that had chosen him (Robert Rubin, Larry Summers, Tim Geithner and others) where he was going. The bankers did well as did the insurance executives but where did his campaigning promises vanish to?<br/>Nice to see the editorial board putting this issue on the front page, must say that.
Perhaps he did this to see which Democrats would publicly kick and scream against him. <br/><br/>Now he's got a good idea who are creating the problems in the Democratic party. Bernie of course, but Warren was just as bad.<br/><br/>For Sanders and Warren to go to the press and not to Obama directly with their opinions is what you call being a bad teammate. <br/><br/>These issues should be addressed "in the clubhouse" and not "on the field". <br/><br/>As for the payment, if you think for a minute that Obama was a tool of Wall St, go to <a href="http://c-span.com" title="c-span.com" target="_blank">c-span.com</a> and listen to the last 10 hearing held by the Senate and House Financial Services Committees. You will see what Republicans and the bankers think of his administration. 
 I could not be more in agreement.<br/><br/>A lonely position to date.
When it comes to being a true person of principle, Jimmy Carter still shines brighter than any other POTUS of our time.
Here's your problem. It's ok if your guy cashes in. The problem is Obama is still young and can still shape the politics in this country in a progressive direction, but not if he is tainted. It did not help Hillary (nor us who are stuck with an infinitely more corrupt character as President) that she made money legitimately, giving expensive speeches to Wall Street. Obama now has a huge target painted on his back and will be like Typhoid Mary if he wants to get involved in politics again.
Let me state to begin with that I write as a great admirer of Barack Obama (from well before he became PotUS and practically right through his Presidency).<br/><br/>I believe Obama made a serious mistake in accepting the Nobel Award for Peace (in anticipation, so to speak, for whatever he might do in the future as PotUS!) That significantly reduced - to my mind - his stature as a 'world leader'.<br/><br/>Doubtless he's made other mistakes during his Presidency - but as an outsider (not even a US citizen!), I'm really not qualified to judge what those mistakes might be.<br/><br/>But I believe he's had some very significant successes indeed as PotUS - and he was a leader of whom the US can rightly feel very proud indeed. (In his successor, the US has a leader who should be impeached and his entire mal-Administration thrown onto the garbage heap of history - its rightful home).<br/><br/>I believe the New York Times is seriously wrong in seeking to question the fees that Barack Obama might command as a speaker.  It may well be right to suggest that he could donate those fees to his Foundation, or whatever.<br/><br/>May I suggest that the NYT should think in terms of applying some 'systems thinking' (ST) in order to think of and write up its editorials?  <br/><br/>(The seminal contributions of the late John N. Warfield to 'systems modeling' [SM]) now make it entirely possible for people-at-large to apply the sophisticated ideas of systems science directly to the problems and issues that concern them from day to day).
Let's put that measly $400,000 in perspective:<br/><br/>Thanks to having three wives, three regular residences, and two boys jetting around the world to strike Daddy's deals, the new secret service budget for protecting the Trumps rings in at $120,000,000.<br/><br/>And that's the taxpayers' money -- you know, the manna that Republicans used to cherish -- not the loose change of investment billionaires.
I look forward to learning where this $400,000. ends up.  In the best of all possible worlds,  perhaps the Obama's will make an effort to fund some of the changes they brought to the White House, that the current administration is now trashing.
Wow!  You can get Barack Obama to speak for only $400,000?  Given his experience, stature, knowledge--not to mention his incredible speaking ability which must rank him at the top of all presidents--I would say that 400 grand is a bargain! Indeed, that's the exact amount that presidents are paid to supervise 2.7 million people.  In the private sector, the job would pay in the millions.  I doubt whether Washington or Lincoln would have turned that money down.
Why would anyone expect former President Obama to work for free or a lesser amount than past Presidents?<br/><br/>Unlike the current vulgar occupant, former President Obama waited until he exited the Oval Office.
I wish he wouldn't do it. And wish he would start to take up the mantle the world is trying to give him of "Reasonable, effective young leader" while everyones fighting off the far-right and neo-nationalists of all stripes across Europe. He's squandering his (considerable) capital with a lousy $400k speech.<br/>The world needs him. First, to drop neoliberalism, then to get the train of freedom running there as well as here. Momentum builds. Wall Street doesn't need that momentum. Main Street does.<br/>Please Mr Obama don't do this.We'll do a GoFundMe and get you twice the amount in hours, for you NOT to do the speech.<br/>We'll get major networks to pay you to deliver talks on current affaurs, economics, history, whatever you want to talk about, as frequently as you want to do it. Could we ever use it, we've never been in such upside down land.<br/>It's not too late to reconsider your life's arc.
Fair enough.  I expect Obama to redirect most of these fees to his choice of charities, either directly or indirectly.  If he doesn't, I will be extremely disappointed, and you will have good reason to write another editorial.
It is disheartening.<br/>I respect President Obama,  this won't change that.<br/>But I wish he hadn't taken their filthy lucre all the same.<br/>Bad enough that a tone deaf Hillary Clinton helped elect Donald Trump by taking Wall Street bribes,  excuse me,  speaking fees.<br/>I expected much better from our President.
I'd adore if Obama 'd be co-founding a S.O.S. Democracy charity, Save Our Sick Democracy, as a counter-instrument against the gerrymandering and voter suppression that gave us a Republican President and Congress plus many governors, fanatically spread by the efforts of ALEC and the Heritage Foundation. Go to <a href="http://gregpalast.com/" title="gregpalast.com/" target="_blank">gregpalast.com/</a> to understand the scope and don't miss <a href="http://richardcharnin.wordpress.com/" title="richardcharnin.wordpress.com/" target="_blank">richardcharnin.wordpress.com/</a><br/><br/>If the entire speech fee would flow straight into that charity, I'd start crowdfunding for 400,000 dollars to have him give a speech at my house immediately.<br/><br/>Okay, first I'd have to organize a house in the USA. Then I'd have to pass border control, who'd be informed about this post. So I probably would be absent from the crowd at the speech I'd have helped organize. But I'd celebrate with a broken jaw in indefinite detention anyway!<br/><br/>Hillary Clinton, who was on board with Monsanto, has a charity that boasts it helps the poor improve their crops. Alas it is a vehicle to help Big Agro Chem press its ugly pesticide feet on the lashed face of the earth, delivering short-term crop boosts at the price of strong long-term ecological and health setbacks. What Politifact misses out on here, <a href="http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2016/sep/06/clinton-foundation-tanzania-work-farmers/" title="http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2016/sep/06/clinton-foundation-tanzania-work-farmers/" target="_blank">http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2016/sep/06/clinton-foun...</a>, is maize and soy beans monoculture mean neonics and RoundUp causing cancer and ecociding the bees.<br/><br/>It'd be nice, if Obama'd engage in charity where no big buck can ever be seen to draw ugly profits from.
Oh no you did not!!  HE should set an example?  How?  By accepting less?  He accepted less when racial epithets were directed at him.  He accepted less when he was obstructed at every turn.  He accepted less when members of Congress said they would do everything they could to obstruct him at every turn.  Set a better example?  HE HAS DONE THAT AND THEN SOME!!  He should accept every penny for his having lived through the worst treatment any president has ever endured!  He has raised the bar as president.  Demand that #45 do the same!
"Don't do stupid things."<br/><br/>Obama is the saving face of the Democratic Party, and the bad publicity of him taking big buck speech money from the monied elite is a recipe for disaster at the midterms. These midterms look like they'll decide whether America becomes a fascist tyranny or starts the long walk back toward a democracy, handicapped by a fascist and feudalist Supreme Court and a fascist and fully evil administration, but God and the Obamas bless saved by a Democratic Congress as a counterforce. I personally wish Obama all private joy and wealth there's to amass, but he is currently the symbol of the integrity of the public service that the Democrats stand for. As he goes, so threatens to go the fate of the resistance. So if there's anyone I'm on my knees for to pray he'll steer a wise course, it's Obama.<br/><br/>The DNC ignored that in 2012 the Rs lost to Romney's bad image &amp; vibes as an infathomably rich guy with rich man ties and prejudices. That in 2013 the SPD in Germany got decimated over the speaking fees of its frontrunner. That voters in Britain preferred Corbyn over the neo-liberal party elite. Ignored the continuous suffering of the 99% by responding with belittling inflexibility to the sudden rise of Sanders. Superdelegate-superimposed a champion of paid speeches and the semblance of quid-pro-quo's instead, ignoring the rise of a populist in the enemy camp. Ignored the Rust Belt. And went bust.<br/><br/>If the Democrats don't come to their senses now, what's it gonna take?
S400,000 per hour amounts to $111 per second, or $6666 per minute, or $3,200,000 per eight hour day, or $16,000,000 per week, or $832,000,000 per year. This exceeds the annual income of the highest paid CEO. A person who could accurately predict the future for the next four years, perhaps, would deserve such a fee.<br/><br/>Did Mr. Obama tell his audience anything that they did not already know? I doubt it. So, why did they pay out such a high fee? Maybe, there is a message for all future Presidents to be on good terms with Wall Street in order to command fat speaking fees as ex-Presidents.<br/><br/>Perhaps an inquisitive journalist would dig out the transcript of the ex-President’s speech in order to educate the public. It may turn out to be entirely banal.<br/><br/>Ex-presidents want to, and perhaps need to, maintain a high standard of living, something to which they got accustomed in the White House. Mr. Obama worked 16 hour days for eight stressful years and got paid a measly $1095 per day for it. That is small compared to the salary of CEO's of big corporations. Sure, the perks of the President greatly exceeded the monthly salary, but the perks don't add anything to his personal wealth. He gets a handsome pension. He can probably live very well on it for the rest of his life without any additional income. The question is: Should he?
This is absurd. He should get whatever the market bears. All this bogus morality is nonsense. He gave us everything he had for 8 years. He could have taken his brilliant legal mind,  his great intelligence and charismatic, sincerely likable style to wealth in the private sector. He should be paid whatever anyone is willing to pay.<br/>If he becomes a partner or exec in sports or corporate America they'd be lucky to have him. His sacrifice was incredibly great. Hi Obama go. Enjoy life while you help the screwup Democratic Party to rebuild.
The points in the article, and in this discussion, pro and con, are valid; and I myself do not feel comfortable deciding for other people what they should and should not do in their private lives, and the Obamas are now private citizens. Still, I've been looking for someone to say in a simple fashion what, I believe (as a historian) posterity will say: his party lost an extremely fateful election in which the issue of economic inequality was paramount, and within days he positioned himself to be photographed on yachts with multi-millionaires. That will tarnish Obama's legacy -- and I wonder whether the 400K speaking fee, and the yacht trips, have given him what he really wants and needs, since, to outsiders (in the Sanders camp, and beyond it) this sort of behavior appears to compromise what he worked so hard to achieve, that is, the reputation of a public figure who cares about "real" people. It's a very hard thing to process, quite frankly -- and the NYTimes is to be commended for raising the issue.
I cannot help laughing at all the displays of gullibility on this comment thread.  Obama is just like every other politician.  He sold Americans on a message of "hope" and "change" but wants a lot of money to compensate for the years of "sacrifice" as a politician.  Why else do you think that he and Michelle chose to acquire a very expensive house in the Kalorama neighborhood of Washington DC, the most exclusive neighborhood in that city?  So now he's cashing in on his status as ex-President to make millions in book deals and many more dollars giving speeches.  <br/><br/>Bernie Sanders, "man of the people," is no different.  People get focused on the reported income on his tax statements and forget all the very lucrative financial perks that come with being a member of Congress. Sanders' tax return showed income of only a little more than $200,000 for 2014 but the senator's expected retirement benefits make his situation much more comparable to those in the millionaire class he faults.  Moreover, the vast majority of Americans don't realize that Senators have their travel expenses paid for in full by taxpayers whenever they go on congressional delegation trips to anywhere in the world. Having lived and worked in DC and dated a legislative aide, I learned how all the Congressmen plan trips of one kind of another under the guise of congressional business.  So their real income is far higher than reported.  And we all know that Bernie will gladly take money for speeches once he retires.
Obama's not without his faults.  However, accepting the money for his speech is not one of them. After working eight years with the issues he handled with grace and intelligence, it's okay for him to make his money. Like others have stated, he'll probably donate some of his earnings as well. He has a conscience.<br/><br/>Compare Obama's largesse to that of Trump. Remembering Trump's alleged "charitable" giving there's no comparison. The NY Attorney General came after him.  And that's just the beginning. Which goes along with Trump's lack of morality, and his motto that Trump is always first, before anyone or anything else, especially our country. <br/><br/>There is no comparison. Obama's a giver.  Trump is a taker. Never has the comparison of these two individuals  been as stark.
Football players make more than that per game.  The people at the top of almost any field make obscene amounts of money.  If this is bad, it calls into question our current economic and social system, not just the actions of one actor.  If it is good, then there is no problem.  In either case, Obama is not the issue.  
Ex-elected officials make speeches and write books. <br/><br/>That comes with election to high offices. As long as it's done done after leaving office... more power to him!<br/><br/>Now back to the important stuff. Let's talk about our CURRENT president and his ties to Russia!
This article might as well say the Black President doesn't deserve to make the kind of money Bush or Clinton made.  Not to mention that Reagan made over a million dollars for a speech he made.  This is racist on so many levels.  As usual Obama is held to a higher standard than any other president.  As far as I am concerned he can make as much money as he possibly can. Especially when the Trump clan is costing taxpayers more in 6 months than Obama's family cost in 8 years foe securit
You can sum it all up with one word. Greed. 
The cretins in the GW Bush administration lied this country into a war that killed and maimed thousands and most all of them have made millions in their books and speeches. President Obama was shown reprehensible hatred during his 8 years. He deserves whatever he is paid for tolerating the abject hatred he had to endure.we taxpayers are paying MILLIONS for the trump tribe's travels and where is the outrage? Where is the outrage for this one family of thugs ruining our country. President Obama deserves whatever monies he can get!
Do I care, no!
If I thought for a second that anyone on the NYT editorial board would turn down a  $400,000 fee, I might give a hoot about the criticisms in this column.
I guess that the Times editorial board is attempting to appear egalitarian and I suppose that is commendable.  But isn't it more than a little ironic, since #45 is padding his nest, and those of his family, while he is in office?
Where do we get the right to determine what amount of money someone else deserves to be paid - or what they should do with the money? I am not a fan of President Obama. I didn't vote for him either time. I wouldn't pay $0.50 to hear him speak. But I don't begrudge him receiving whatever amount of money someone is willing to pay him. And what he chooses to do with it is none of my business, or yours. He occupies a singular place in history. If he chooses to (dare I say it) "capitalize" on it that's his right. He doesn't owe you, me, the world, or anyone else more than he has already given.<br/>And, by the way, what makes a "work-a-day" approach to leadership vulgar? This article drips with the progressive elitism that so distanced the Democratic Party from those vulgar work-a-day people who felt ignored and forgotten. And before you start the "you're a racist" comments I am African American. I just think for myself.
So will Obama share his comments on health care to Cantor Fitzgerald with the public? Or, like Hillary, claim his contract doesn't allow him to?  Wikileaks was able to publish only his talk to bankers in Brazil.
Obama decided to go the way of Bill Clinton, betraying his admirers and destroying his legacy. He doesn't seem to care what his successor is doing to his nation. His attitude seems to be that he did his best and now it's his turn to ride off in a helicopter while the nation sinks.
<br/>"RM",<br/>commenting below,<br/>got this situation exactly correct ...<br/><br/>even the 'hint' that this honorarium is a pay-back for work well-done while the president was in office for these payees is staggering to consider.<br/>why raise the possibility of skullduggery?<br/><br/>in the end,<br/>Mr. Obama ran a very non-transparent operation,<br/>and 'we-the-people' will not find-out the true connections made and kept within and without his White House for many decades to come.<br/><br/>none of this should have happened...<br/>the halo,<br/>previously well earned and deserved,<br/>just slipped.<br/><br/>ouch    
So what did he say?
I read the first few paragraphs ,,,<br/>Of course the Man should cash in from his presidency ...<br/>do you not think he won't put that money to good use ???
I think Trump should pay Obama $400k for each of his birther comments. Since that's not going to happen this is a fine substitute. 
Hilarious, even the NYT editorial board can't hold their noses on this stinker.  Hope that Obama waits until after he lectures the Cantor-Fitz crew on the evils of capitalism and corporate greed before he picks up his $400,000 check.  Just another limousine liberal.
Whether or not Obama accepts huge fees for speaking is not the reason why Democrats are being perceived as out of touch. If monetary reward were the key issue affecting voters opinions, Trump would have been boo'ed off the stage. No, it's not the fees shading the picture, its the actual things the Democrats are saying (or not saying) that is dogging them. Duh. Their message is just not resonating with the working class who feel left behind. Folks don't care if you make a billion or a buck, if you just talk like them and address their fears and wants (as Trump so shrewdly did) they will love you.  Think about it: Trump is cashing in WHILE he's president and his base couldn't care less.
The 400k is partial payback for accepting Tim Geithner as Treasury secretary, as per Wall St's instructions..... more to $ to come, I'm sure.
He plans to take on gerrymandering.  Nationwide.  That means research, court costs, and top lawyers.  And probably all the way to SCOTUS.  You think that comes cheap?  How do you propose he raise that kind of money?  A bake sale?  
I am bitterly disappointed. The former president has every right to make money off the admiration he won while in office, but I have every right to feel either that he is betraying his own ideals or that he fooled me about them all along.
Obama won the support of so many Americans by appealing to our sense of hope, fairness, and opportunity, the patriotic values we hold most dear. By chumming up with the financiers whom he also failed to prosecute after the housing collapse, he presents himself as merely another Ivy League wonk who passively believes that wage earners in a gig economy can feel secure with whatever scraps the investor class begrudgingly shares with them. As Mr. Sanders and Ms Warren continue to explain to a tone deaf Democratic party: this is why you lost the election. Real people are very stressed out by the fat cat economics you espouse. What will you offer those who can't be managers or CEOs?
Obama, black and essentially fatherless, has spent his whole life working to achieve a sense of belonging -- of belonging to this countries powerful elite.  His whole life has been devoted to this cause. <br/><br/>This isn't to say he hasn't done some -- perhaps much -- good. <br/><br/>But the innermost drive behind everything he's done has been his desire to be accepted among the powerful elite.  <br/><br/>He can't help it.    
Do we know that President Obama isn't donating the fee or a portion of it to his nascent foundation?<br/><br/>It would be worthy diversion of those dollars and it is hard to imagine that his new earnings wouldn't be used at least in part to seed his new initiatives. 
Like it or not, optics are important and for a President who regularly espoused "hope and change", and with a majority in both houses in the first two years of his mandate where serious advancements could have been made in the important areas of healthcare while putting those in jail that brought the countries to its economic knees in 2008,  he really accomplished little.  Add to that, in the last 10 yrs. and during his two terms in office,  the democratic party was decimated in the process.<br/><br/>This just confirms that with former politicians in America, ultimately it is "business as usual" and facing the reality that the Wall Street types were among his largest campaign donors,  Obama really isn't any different after all.
Barack Obama is a private citizen and has a perfect right to make money in this manner.<br/>Unlike DT who is bilking the US taxpayer out of $120 million to provide security for his family while they travel on family business- and should be paying for their own security, Obama has every right to make money. he, unlike our current grafter in chief, did not make it while in office.<br/>Moreover, Obama did not pack his cabinet with Wall St insiders and say he is draining the swamp.<br/>Let's not focus the concern of made up optics- but rather worry about the real corruption of Donald Trump who is treating the office of POTUS like his personal ATM machine.
Let's be honest here- he could get $1 million per speech if he was really interested in making money. The Obamas have shown every year-because they released their tax returns-their pattern of giving which by most standards, is generous. This was while their considerable assets were in a blind trust. One would believe that pattern of philanthropy will continue as they are establishing  a foundation. 
Oh please! Democrats had 8 years to learn from President Obama's example, and it was an excellent one.  The NYTimes has no claim on his life and business choices moving forward.  He can and will conduct himself according to the internal compass that brought him succesfully to this point and your armchair criticism is neither warranted nor appreciated.
Sending this again: I miss the elegance, grace, intelligence, and humor that the Obamas shared with America every day. I do not begrudge Mr. Obama a speaker’s fee. He has earned access to the wealthy. As a private citizen who does not come from inherited wealth, he needs to earn a living to support himself, his family, and the good works he will undoubtedly do in his post-presidency. <br/><br/>As a speaker, one sets one’s fee based on the value that the speech brings to the audience as well as to the ability of those extending the invitation to pay. In my mind, $400K for a speech to Wall Street may undervalue the influence that Mr. Obama may have on his audience. He is not betraying his values, but shows his understanding of what others value. <br/><br/>However, let’s talk about values. I do wish the NYT editors would spend less time on Mr. Obama’s speaker’s fee and more on the lies and ignorant bluster that comes out of the White House daily. You let us down during the election cycle, allowing the dumbing down of the discourse to go unchecked until the very end, and poking jabs at Mrs. Clinton’s campaign with a false pretense of fairness. Stop thinking that you are playing fair when you normalize the hypocrisy, poor language, and unsteadiness of the current White House while bothering to write an editorial on Mr. Obama’s well-earned speaker’s fees. I have no doubt that the Obamas are not greedy and they will remain lights for all who value truth during this darkening time.
I think the people justifying Obama's cashing in are Republicans anyway. 
Why do you make this an issue about Obama, Hillary and Democrats to the exclusion of Republicans?<br/><br/>Given the history and current actions of Republicans - Wall Street, Kansas, union busting, Trump and his administration's obscene in-our-faces corruption, dismantling of regulations, Russia, tax "reform" and health care, none of which serve the middle and under-served classed - you instead focus on Democrats?  <br/><br/>False equivalence, in a big way.  Stop.  
Does he need the money?<br/><br/>I don't blame him.  But he has cheapened himself.
It's unseemly, how much the wealth 1% has, and that they want more. A huge swath of Americans are struggling to get by, and then you have people like the Obama's, the Trumps, Wall Street, Big Oil, the Kochs etc, who just can't get enough. Maybe the Obama's are small fry compared to the rest, but sixty-five million isn't enough?This tells you the kind of world our upper class lives in. This is not a democrat, republican, race or gender issue. It's a class issue, and this level of greed is obscene.
Your editorial has afforded me much humor on this day of outright inanity/insanity from the Trump Administration.<br/><br/>How much is too much for a speech?<br/>What is the going rate for a President like Obama to get for a speech?<br/><br/>It was private money not public monies.  It was an important speech to those who control the direction of invested wealth.  He was out to use his cachet to influence his audience.  Hey, since they could afford to pay it, why not?
So, he's getting paid handsomely by the criminals he refused to prosecute and put in jail.  As Holder cynically declared "They're too big too jail."  Especially when you (Obama) are the one receiving the bribes.  What was it Mencken said: "Elections are advanced auctions on stolen goods."  I think the auctions of those stolen goods last long into the post Presidency. 
Hey, before we pass impassioned judgement, let's see what he does with the cash.  
I am convinced that both political parties are complicit in the destruction of a democracy that was founded on being a "government of the people, by the people, and for the people." I despise the Republicans for openly embracing the interests of a small minority.  But at least they are honest about it.  Democrats on the other hand are way worse morally since they profess to represent the interests of the common man.  There is an old saying among socialists that sums it up the best:  The Republican will stab you in the heart, but beware of the Democrats because they will stab you in the back."  It is past time to throw both parties out of office.  The don't deserve out votes.
Much to do about nothing...if you could afford it, anyone here who got invited to join Obama or Trump with 500 other people for two hours at a $1000 a plate lunch or dinner, who wouldn't go? Only 6 living persons have that perspective. 
As a private citizen, Barack Obama is entitled to earn whatever he wishes. Donald Trump "earned" millions by scamming Trump Univ. enrolees. Surely Obama, a Nobel laureate, deserves the high honorarium. When Trump's criminal acts are exposed, justice and decency demand he return his illegally gotten (per emoluments clause) gains.
He already has the platform. Rejecting this money is worth one hundred times what they will pay him. <br/><br/>Much to the delight of crony capitalists, if he accepts this money, he will lose influence worth ten times this money.
Oh, please, Times Editors, don't be snowflakes in this cauldron:<br/> In the context of the wildly dangerous morass we are all currently trapped in, Barack Obama could, as they say, shoot someone on 5th Ave and I'd still vote for him over anybody the so-called Republicans could put up against him. Period. 
Leave the man alone. His presidency is over. Make that money, Obama!
Give the money to a good cause or directly to people in need.<br/>Your honor is worth more than the insignificant change the money will make in your life.
So what do you want, that Obama work in a soup kitchen?  Were he to have been paid by the hour, the presidential salary would have been astronomical. For eight years, he was on call 24/7.  A person needs a four month hiatus from public life to recharge the battery.  Considering what he gave the country, $400,000 is chump change.  What president has Mitch McConnell on January 20 announce that this president would have one term governance?  What president tried to work with Congress in good faith only to find that it was made up of selfish, bigoted, small minded people who did not work for the national interest.  I do not begrudge any president, even Trump,<br/>any opportunity to participate in activities that will wash the mental wounds that occur while attempting to preside.  You go kid!     
Another Democrat who ran on the promise of representing the disenfranchised cashes in with Wall Street. And Democratic supporters rush to his defense. To paraphrase Aunt Lydia, this must feel strange now but eventually this will all seem normal.
Sounds like the Times editors took all of Obama's eloquent talk on inequality seriously? Did they forgot that Obama was the one who froze federal employee pay during the worst years of the recession, put bankers in charge of principal reduction decisions in his HAMP program, and twice recommended cuts to Social Security?
"As a couple and a family, the Obamas brought grace, empathy and high standards to their time in the White House in stark contrast to the workaday vulgarity of its currents occupants."  I assume you mean the Trumps when you write "current occupants."  You favor the Obamas but not everyone would agree with your assessment of them.  Not everyone was in awe of the Obamas and if Obama had been so successful as president, Hillary Clinton might be in the White House now.  He is partly to blame for her failure and he was not admired by everyone.  Some of us are even glad he is gone.  <br/><br/>The Trump family is anything but vulgar but you are showing your bias against them as this newspaper does on a daily basis.  Ivanka and Melania are lovely and gracious and as refined as any two people you will meet. They are also beautiful. Some of us prefer Donald Trump over Obama and feel he is doing more for our country in his short time in office then Obama did in his entire presidency.  Of course, you loathe him but he won the election so many people disagree with your views.
Almost all of the “Mainstream” US Democrats and US Republicans in the US congress participate in "PAY TO PLAY crony capitalism" when our elected representatives receive money, wine, food, women, song, corporate jobs for their (unemployable) children/wives/girlfriends of the congressmen, vacations, pre-paid sexual services, and campaign contributions to entice (bribe) our congressmen to award them NO-BID government contracts with US taxpayer money paid from the US Treasury paid from the US Treasury, control of US foreign policy, and also to pass whatever new legislation that the “DONOR CLASS” and PAC (foreign and domestic) clients of the lobbyists wants the elected officials to create.<br/><br/>The "DONOR CLASS" of US citizens, foreign governments, foreign citizens and foreign businesses make contributions to politicians only in return for congressional legislative influence and government favors such as Free Trade Agreements, Most Favored Nation trade statuses, Permanent Normal Trade Relations, military secret Hughes Aircraft Rocket Guidance Technology export license to Communist China (Google "Chinagate"), pork barrel NO-BID contract(s), gigantic “PAY TO PLAY” Military-Industrial Complex NO-BID military contracts, Solyndra type pay to play US government guaranteed business loans, CGI Federal PAY TO PLAY political power influenced no-bid contract awards, Foreign Aid, and etc. that are paid out of the public treasury and are not in the best interest of the US citizens. 
Jimmy Carter looks better and better each passing year.
President Obama will not be president again. It is highly unlikely he would ever be a lobbyist. So what is the problem of him to accept a 400,000 - or even more - on behalf of his foundation? <br/><br/>Neither is he likely to preach prosperity gospel. <br/><br/>Bernie and Sen Elizabeth Warren - even though I have voted for her and may do so again - are wrong to think accepting engagement fees from Wall Street is necessarily wrong. There are good and bad characters in both the 1% and the 99%. Just because one is rich doesn't necessarily disqualify oneself. By the same token, being poor doesn't one good or bad. <br/><br/>That is the real example. President Carter is a honorable and highly principled man. Mr Obama could too by different method. But for fun, I wonder how many who criticize Mr Obama and others rubbing elbows with Wall Street also want their children work for one
Obama had high hopes for America and thought greatly.of hard working Americans. Unfortunately Americans have shown they hate blacks more than they love themselves, culminating with Trump's election.<br/><br/>Obama worked very hard. He deserves a break and  all the money.
Has anyone asked what he's going to do with the money?
It should be noted, and not forgotten, that the first trip Ronald Reagan took as former president was a $2million speaking tour of Japan sponsored by Japan's Fujisankei communications conglomerate.<br/><br/>Just sayin', ya know...
It's funny . . . nobody cared how much people got paid for speeches until the lady and the black guy came along.
Indeed, I am very disappointed and disgusted. Let's hear it for Jimmy Carter! I guess Obama is no Bernie. Sad, as the malicious clown would say, and probably will. 
Oh goodness gracias people. Yes, the Obamas have a right to make as much as they can. And yes, it is unseemly for the Obamas to have become part of the 1 percent, given that it is contrary to their public statements over the years. Yes, they have a right to be close friends with billionaires and millionaires and celebrities and enjoy long vacations on private islands. But to read all these comments defending the Obamas as if they needed a defense is too much. They're more than OK - they have solidified their status in the 1 percent world. Obama even said he would never fly on a commercial plane again. Money does that to some people. He spent a day being the editor of WIRED magazine, I guess because being president did not keep him busy enough. When will people stop considering him beyond criticism? He is pursuing what most people dream of -- immense wealth. It's not cool in him because he presented himself as a different kind of man. Tuns out, he thrills at hanging out with Tom Hanks and Beyonce. Oh well...
If President Obama can get those saps on Wall Street to pay him $400,000 maybe that means he can charge $100 and gas money to another organization at the other end of the economic arc.
Tragic.  No wonder Wall Street got bailed out and workers were left to rot.  Nice work if yiu can get it.
At least Obama waited until he left office before cashing in. Hillary was greedy. She wanted her cake and eat it too.<br/><br/>Clinton is to blame for Trump. Her and her lousy campaign, snatching defeat from the jaws of victory. What loathsome creatures she had forging a losing effort.<br/><br/>Obama is doing what he wants as a private citizen. A bad look? Maybe, but it's his business.
That's why they are the party of HYPOCRITES.  
I can only stomach so much, but of the 10  nytimes picks I read, nyt has got Obama's back, but as we say in the south, it's the front ya gotta watch 
Yes, by comparison to DJT,  Mr. Obama was the gold standard. However,  he didn't prosecute Wall Street for the most egregious con scheme since the Great Depression and as such, he may have gotten he who's name we won't mention, elected. I'm sorry, but opologists for this betrayal either don't understand the magnitude of wrongdoing or are simply complicit in some perverse or naive manner. Please tell me what it means when the champion for "change we can believe in" is himself a charleton . DJT's  bafoonery will never outweigh my disappointment in Mr. Obama's duplicity. 
Crazy to knock him - no scandals, impeccable brilliance and he and his family took the heat of that office for 8 years.<br/>He deserves whatever the market will pay.<br/>Crazy critics in comments go on and on.<br/>He could have made a fortune in the private sector. Then when he is you'll say it's because he was president and neglect his amazing background
Meanwhile, $120 million will be spent on security for trump and his family so they can live in separate cities and fly out for golf weekends to enjoy their lovely chocolate cake.  
Unless he donates the entire fee to charity, it is surprising how many commenters fail to see the ethical conundrum that accepting such an enormous amount of money in exchange of one speech represents for a former US president, and particularly for Obama. It is one single act that reflects his true colors. 
well at least he made public his tax returns, and he did not enrich himself and his family through his public office.<br/>While in office he worked to have legislation passed that would benefit the common citizens of this country.  That is what is important.<br/>If someone is willing to pay him that amount of money for a speech, then why would he turn it down? He does not need to earn the median<br/>American salary to prove that he has enough empathy for the common man.<br/>He has proved that already
I do worry that this is painting Democrats further into a dark corner where party members do not believe their elite politicians get them. Yet nobody deserves to be rewarded for 8 years of thankless service more than the Obama's. He was either vilified or taken for granted and he was a phenomenal president. I would feel better about it if he put all of these speaking funds into his foundation. For all we know he may do just that. I also agree with the writers concern of presidents unconsciously making laws while still in office that benefit those companies who will be paying him to speak later. 
Does anyone know for a fact that he is depositing the fee in his personal account? Aren't we all in some small way benefiting from his fees in increased tax revenue?Isn't he entitled to earn income? My guess is that patience will show us if Barack Obama has lost his idealism. I believe the integrity and thoughtfulness he demonstrated over and over are still present in ways that we will slowly see unfold. .
<br/>T.E.B.:<br/>in the limits of space and of time for an Editorial,<br/>you have scored this one correctly.<br/><br/>thank you for conciseness, clarity, and references to historic information.<br/><br/>to the many, many naysayers:<br/>there is ample room here to honestly and to earnestly disagree with these specifics.<br/>we need to keep these conversations going.<br/><br/>tomorrow,<br/>let us re-pledge ourselves to seek-out the best results possible for the common good of the vast majority of our fellow citizens.<br/>anything less is an unprovoked betrayal of the original faith and hope we had for the Obamas and for ourselves.<br/><br/>CHEERS !!
If Barack Obama wants to spend his post-Presidential years giving well-compensated speeches, writing non-controversial memoirs, and generally cashing in his fame in a strictly capitalist manner, I don't care how he does it.<br/><br/>However, if he intends to ever be a politician or political figure again, I have serious issues with him taking money from people who stand to benefit from government policy.  If he continues to wield any political influence, it isn't the dollar amounts that offend me, but the appearance that his political influence could be bought.
At a glance, it seems that most of the comments here take the line, "Everybody's entitled to make money."<br/><br/>Well, yes, but this is not about entitlement, and it's not about everybody. If it comes to that, ex-presidents are entitled to become greeters at Las Vegas casinos.<br/><br/>Who is it hurting? I can't reply with a list of names, but there is harm in the spectacle of the nation's leading democrat shedding that identity with his presidential mantle and proceeding to sell himself for whatever the market will bear. It gives the impression that democrats and, more particularly, Democrats are just playing a political game.<br/><br/>I fancy that Bernie Sanders would walk a different road. Am I naive? Is Bernie?<br/><br/><a href="http://thefamilyproperty.blogspot.jp/" title="http://thefamilyproperty.blogspot.jp/" target="_blank">http://thefamilyproperty.blogspot.jp/</a>
This report makes me more sad than the election loss which the Democratic party, and the country as a whole suffered, in November.  After that loss, I was sustained by the belief that we could be true to our values, and by doing so, then eventually 'bend the arc of the moral universe towards justice, in the words of Obama, and MLK.  I know that many of you shared this belief, which fueled resolve and protests.<br/>Now this report.<br/>In this country, with its problems of underemployment and despair for working families, how is it possible that Obama thinks that his words are worth 10 times the annual salary of the average person working in this country?  Where is the justice in that?<br/>I supported Obama, I think that he kept his moral compass during difficult times.<br/>Now this.<br/>He seems to be just another rich and selfish member of the elite, feeding at the trough of self-interest and self-aggrandizement which is wrecking the moral core of the country.  If he accepts this fee, how can he have moral standing to criticize the greed of Trump and his cabinet.<br/>Very sad.<br/>He should refuse this payment, or donate the whole fee to charity. 
When you look at Obama's tax returns, it's impressive to see the percentage given to charity. I suspect that this "cashing in" is going to help him support his foundation and other activities or charities. And what he keeps for himself and his family is fine with me. I believe he will still set an example for many of us.
I am stunned at the majority of comments here decrying this editorial and accusing the NYT of taking this position because Barak Obama is a black man. Did you not read the line: "The tens of millions that Hillary Clinton raised from speaking to corporate interests most likely haunts her now — or should."  The editorial board isn't singling Obama out because of the color of his skin: They are singling him out because they get how this business of raking in millions from corporate speaking fees is corrupting our political process and compromising our leaders and, most significantly, was a major factor in HRC's loss.  Even if what businessman Trump is doing now - as president - to cash in is far worse, voters perceived him to be less beholden to special interests and Wall Street than public servant HRC and perception is _everything_.<br/><br/>The modern DP used to be viewed as the party of working folks and now it is seen as the party of the urban professional class, thanks in part to the change in direction of the party in the mid-'80s; but also because of unfettered money in politics. Eight years on, we see the toll that Citizens United has taken and how deeply it is corrupting our politics. Big Money is devouring our system, destroying good government. Democrats have to go back to fighting for campaign finance reform if we want to save our democracy. And to do that we need leaders who have the moral strength and courage to resist this financial gluttony that is the new norm.
I don't have a problem with Pres. Obama getting a high fee from Wall Street investors, for whom $400,000 is probably what they would have spent hosting an after-party at this year's White House Correspondents' Dinner if Pres. Trump had chosen to come.  I would have a problem if he were to ask for such a fee from a university or organizations involved in public service, charity, etc.  
Well then, request disclosures, and list all speaking fees received by all former presidents who are still alive (and by prominent members of their administrations).  Then analyze and report as much as you wish and ask them all to forsake their funds.  Otherwise, it is resentment and hypocrisy to single out Barack Obama for receiving speaking fees, and expect him alone to somehow rise above the path taken by all preceding presidents.<br/>Keep your eye on the current president and his entourage, and the endless business trips of the Trump family to countries where they have business interests and travel with security provided by taxpayer funds.<br/>Keep your eye on fees received by members of this entourage even before they were formally appointed to their posts in the administration.<br/> In my view, unless ot until all other presidents agree to give up funds received from speaking fees, Mr. Obama should drive a better bargain: $400,000 is on the low side.<br/>We are not going to accept living in a world where it is ok for everyone to be wealthy, except for African Americans. 
Money is power, and right now the Republicans have both. Indeed, isn't Trump's leadership becoming a plutocracy? So now the editorial board wants the Democrats to take the "high road" and reject speech fees? That certainly is one way to keep the Democrats from assuming power in the future.
Really? Let's jump to conclusions before we have all the facts.<br/><br/>I don't care what he gets paid. Does taking a speaking fee discount everything he already did? Was anybody there to hear the speech? Has anyone asked him anything about it for context?<br/><br/>8 years of service to the country, love him or hate him.  Now he's gotta save us, or be like Jimmy Carter, or do some other service to the country, or give it all away, or make a charity or on and on and on.<br/><br/>Whatever. <br/><br/>Meanwhile an article in this paper reported that congress is voting for big increases to protect the new president while he flies all over kingdom cone to rest up from his hard week at work. <br/><br/>Talk about misplaced priorities.<br/><br/>Why don't you focus on that?
President Barack Obama has been the best man to occupy the White House since FDR, in my opinion. His outstanding moral and intellectual qualities, calm approach to complex situations and difficult decisions, and his plain wisdom, and unusual modesty, will make him an extremely hard act to follow, especially during the next four years, and hopefully no longer, as given the "horrible mess" that will no doubt be the next president's "inheritance," an authentic patriot, endowed with "the right stuff" and 20-20 hindsight and foresight, will emerge on the political scene; this, if the so-called "American Dream" is not to fade away forever. Obama will, no doubt, remain true to his values regardless of what his speaking fees may turn out to be, or what he may choose to do with them. 
You guys don't want money in politics? Tough, we as a country, for better or worse (mostly worse) created a system in which you must be wealthy in order to run for office, and on top of that you must be able to raise large sums of money (or at least dupe cable news into giving you free press). Want money out of politics? Decrease the cost of getting elected.
Since Trump has destroyed all decency associated with the presidency, I don't have a problem with Obama taking a few speaking fees. His presidency was a model of  decency, thoughtfulness, and class. I expect he will do good with some of his money. In contrast, Trump doesn't know the meaning of philanthropy.
If you think about it, one of the rewards of the modern presidency is the extreme likelihood of great riches after your term ends.  There are book deals, speaking engagements, sometimes even corporate directorships (Ford served on American Express's board after his short presidency).  Perhaps the opportunity to become seriously rich motivates a person to endure, as Obama did, the extreme hatred of a substantial minority of millions of Americans, to be on crisis call for eight years, to run the risk of assassination.  <br/><br/>In a perfect world, presidents would do as Truman did, and eschew any private gains post presidency.  But it is not a perfect world and after a difficult, but well managed presidency, I do not begrudge Obama for making money.
President Obama's reputation for having the courage to run a candidacy and our government based on "a moral examination of politics" is not tarnished by accepting an honorarium for speaking to Wall Street.  First, (unlike Secretary Clinton), he is not running for office, nor considering a run for office.  Second,  it seems very unlikely that this honorarium is going to be used to buy "gold-ish" bathrooms and $10,000 dollar shower curtains.  If it is, his reputation will indeed be tarnished.<br/><br/>Finally, no one can doubt his commitment to education, to building individual skills, and promoting the continued development of our current and future leaders of our great nation.  Any chance to speak to the economic "elite" should be seen as a gift.  To speak truth to power.  To undermine unproven assumptions.  To make a difference.<br/><br/>Besides, whoever is paying him probably has to because of some arcane corporate rule concerning renumeration and political views.  It is also most likely a tax write-off.     
"The Democratic Party badly needs such an example to follow."  Where was the democratic party when Obama was our president?  Mostly resting on their laurels, and spending lots of time courting corporate donations.  In spite of Obama, the Democrats lost their way over the eight years of his presidency, culminating in a painful, tone deaf, lost campaign.  Maybe he has something to say to bankers about how to balance corporate greed and the civil rights of the people.  He is no longer our president.  He is one of us.  Can we now stop holding him to such a high standard while we crow on making excuses for Trump?  We didn't appreciate him while we had him.
I agree with the editors about the cost of former President Obama accepting $400K for a private speech before financial executives.  Just because other presidents have done the same thing only makes Mr. Obama's decision more costly.  He was a president of great moral rectitude--and many of us hunger for such leadership now more than ever. This is not racism; this is the hope of concerned citizens, who recognize the extraordinary nature of this moment and the importance of leaders rising above business as usual.  Mr. Obama's decision to accept this sum from bankers when millions of Americans are understandably cynical about the motivations of their public servants calls into question--however slightly--the integrity he established so consistently as president. In doing this, he also (inadvertantly) demeans those who look to him for inspiration to walk the higher road.  Many presidents have understood this--in and out of office.  Lincoln, for example, refused to let the White House butcher save the choice cuts for the first family, saying it would not do for him to eat the best meat when his soldiers were hungry.  President Carter has devoted his energies to building houses for poor families and other vital humanitarian causes.  No one is asking the Obamas to forego great wealth now that he is no longer president; and there is no question they will have this.  But HOW Mr. Obama acquires this matters a great deal as Mr. Clinton's history out of office clearly demonstrates.
i think it was Camille Paglia who said that the Republicans don't have the style or political savvy to articulate their goals.  The Democrats are excellent in this regard and can mesmerize large segments of the population with platitudes and moving soliloquies on social justice and civil rights.  The problem is Democrats have recently never followed through when they get into office and now they are paying the price for it.  I apologize to Ms Paglia if I misstated what she said.  Obama's latest foray into post presidential money doesn't surprise anyone.  It will continue and sadly his ego demands it.
   The answer to the authors question is simple.  Because Obama in his post presidency has no more altruistic goals than the Clintons or the Bushes.   Some would argue, and with good reason, that Obamas only interest has been himself.  Just look at the state of the Democrat Party after his eight years and tell me where I am wrong?  
Cashing in on your public service in the government is fundamentally unethical.  What can a person possibly say to a group of people that is worth $400,000?  That's his annual salary as president.  Maybe they are hoping he will spill a few secrets, give them some insider information that they can profit from.  Why is this not a variation of influence peddling?  Why do they get for $400,000?
Many commenters see absolutely no problem whatsoever with this arrangement. Here's the problem: the fee looks like a deferred bribe for the Obama Administration's refusal to prosecute anyone for the financial crisis and for its efforts to weaken Dodd-Frank prior to passage. In other words, it looks like President Obama was on the take from Wall Street during his presidency.<br/><br/>Several commenters have made this point. I have yet to see a single reply to dispute this. Are you all really OK with this?
Pretty ridiculous editorial. The people angry or upset about the high speech fees are being unrealistic.  Obama got where he is through intelligence, hard work, and yes, probably good luck as well but when he got where he was, he didn't forget the "little people." A lot of the policies enacted during his administration were pass to help regular, not wealthy, people. I don't have any problems with people earning as much as the market will bear, especially if what they've done has been of benefit to many and they are not involved in actively destroying the planet, scapegoating others, making money at the expense of the more disadvantaged, etc. In fact, good people should be REWARDED for what they have done to help others. <br/><br/>I also don't think that wealth has an automatic correlation with not being able to understand poorer folks. Eleanor and Theodore Roosevelt both came from one of the richest families in the US yet their actions and policies reflected concern for the poor, ethnic minorities, the disabled, etc. 
The American Revolutionaries who signed the Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776 and then created this great nation were political activists committing criminal acts of high treason. <br/><br/>Those men committed their fortunes and their lives to the creation of the USA. <br/><br/>They would have all been hanged by the English Government for Treason if the American Revolution military forces had failed. <br/><br/>Today, politicians are only in the game for their own personal financial gain with perks, bribes and cash in paper sacks for their congressional votes and for no-bid PAY TO PLAY contracts paid from the taxpayer’s Public Treasury awarded to their political campaign contributors!<br/><br/>Today, only those politicians that accept sufficient campaign contributions or contributions to that politician’s foundation in return for political favors and “PAY TO PLAY” no-bid contract awards from the public treasury can collect enough campaign money in order to buy enough TV advertising can get themselves elected to public office. <br/><br/>The “DONOR CLASS” and the PACs (foreign and domestic) are (probably) very unhappy over the situation of losing free access to taxpayer’s money from the US Treasury and control of US foreign policy if Donald Trump or Bernie Sanders is elected POTUS instead of one of  the elected “Mainstream” US Democrats or Republicans as head of the US government
Hopes dashed...<br/>Is anyone REALLY surprised<br/>that he is a "sell out"?<br/>Once he smelled the perfume<br/>of the rich and famous, he was<br/>hooked.
No one cares. This is a boutique issue that election-wrecking Bernie used to pull support away from Clinton by politically illiterate and political neophyte millenials much to the benefit of the Republicans. People really need to grow up and stop the shallow reactionarianism.
I think Obama should have asked for far, far more, like $10 million and "settled" for 5!  Bleed 'em--5 mill is chump change to them anyway.
President Obama is the most exemplary president, a scholar, a gentleman and deserves every single penny of that $400,000. Perhaps Wall Street will learn something from him. I've supported the NYT for 35 years, but your Editorial Board really got this one wrong. Think again, please.
<br/>indeed,<br/>Mr. Obama would do himself and the country a much better honor were he to chose more closely the post-presidency activities of former president Jimmy Carter.<br/>for example:  contributing this honorary to a top-of-the-mark charity.<br/><br/>as this now stands,<br/>this choice is very, very, very disappointing.<br/><br/>i truly hope that this action does not uncover an underbelly of these New Elites as they precipitate their own fall from grace.<br/><br/>we need this family to continue to shine in the brightest possible way.<br/>heaven help all of us if this alternative is the new-resulting-crash of our trust and faith in them.<br/><br/>sigh
I do not begrudge President Obama for getting paid for speeches after his presidency. I remember President Reagan getting $3 million for spending a week in Japan. I would prefer that Obama contributed this Wall Street $400,000 to a charity of his choice. He could set a new standard for former presidents. Also, with a prospective $60 million book deal, he and Michelle will not be impoverished.
I believe that Obama is possibly your best President ever. That doesn't change my disappointment that no Wall Street bankers went to jail under his watch or that marijuana wasn't decriminalized. Him speaking for big money is also disappointing.
First, having some first hand knowledge of the problem, if Obama does not set a very high price for an appearance, he will be run into the ground making speeches.<br/><br/>Second, let's see if the financial independence he gains from these activities gives him a true platform, and if - and how - he uses it. <br/><br/>The man served 8 years in hell, I mean Washington, and remained cool and focused and rational throughout - not to mention a profoundly good man. If he can do that, I am betting he will be a good ex-president. <br/><br/>He does have to pick his spots. Hold your fire. Let's see more of this picture.
Why is making money only a problem when the Democrats are doing it? All the finger pointing Trump did during the election about Golman Sachs, and his Cabinet is filled with them, not to mention running his business while in office. <br/><br/>Not only am I beyond tired of double standards for Democrats, I am tired of the media going along with it. 
I absolutely agree with this editoria! I was commenting to my family just a week ago that I hope Obama will not follow the path of the Clintons and join the speaking circuit. What a disappointment!
Trump received about 1.5 Million for a speech. Why isn't anyone complaining about that and his excess travel costs every weekend for his golf, his campaigning (doesn't work at White House, but is campaigning for 2020) and all the costs for his kids to go out and make money.<br/>PBO has a right to make an income and give speeches. Stop attacking him and focus on how bad the presidency is being run and grifted by the trump cabal.
Obama's associations only with billionaires and celebrities makes me sick.  This of course was his wont when in office too.  He talks the talk but doesn't walk the walk.  He'll chastise fellow African-American males but pompously takes on the mantle of superiority while parasailing with billionaires on private islands and speeches to the elite 1 per cent.  Overall, I respect Obama and his Presidency but this penchant for fawning and befriending billionaires and celebrities displays his moral character is hollow and wanting, and personally it makes me sick to my stomach.
No one sees the hubris? A bribe is usually given before the fact mostly because tho see doing the bribery aren't  trust worthy. Payment up front relieves doubt on the bribed. Obama had no problem waiting for his payment. He trusted Wall Street and they delivered. The president's retirement is over 200k a few  year and no one should be expected  to live on that. <br/><br/>Speaking of retiement the Republicans philosophically  is against Social  Security and the Democratic party wants to raise the retirement age to where most people are dead before they can collect. As long as Obama is doing good we should all be happy.
Come on, people. Barak Obama is supposed to suffer the slings and arrows of structural racism AGAIN by refusing to be paid what white men (and women) are paid regularly? Give me a break. Keep THAT level of idealism in your dreams and raise a toast to a country that will pay an African-American $400K less than 200 years after keeping bodies like his in (literal) chains.  I'm all against fighting capitalist corruption, but let the Wall Street white guys take a hit first; not Barak Obama.
Very disappointed in president Obama; I kinda figured out that he was inclined to the Wall Street model of government: take the cream and give the verbal idealism to the poor.<br/>Our President, who had been one of heroes, has proven he is tone deaf; he was tone deaf when he endorsed Clinton for the Presidency and he has dropped the ball again.<br/>It will take a really big change in the Democratic Party before I pull a leaver again for the party.
"...every former president but Jimmy Carter has supped often at the corporate table."<br/><br/>Yet another reason to admire Jimmy Carter regardless of the opinion one might hold of him as president. What a fine human being.
It's not that Obama is making a LOT of money for giving speeches. I loathe the man but good for him (and Michelle) for doing so. The problem that many of us have with it is the hypocrisy of the man. He railed for 8 years against the same people he is getting his money from. He railed for 8 years against the filthy rich he hangs around with. And he railed for 8 years asking how much money does someone need to make. A wealthy hypocrite indeed.
"...every former president but Jimmy Carter has supped often at the corporate table."<br/><br/>I had once had the audacity to hope that Barack Obama would emulate Jimmy Carter in that regard. But (alas!) it was apparently too audacious a hope. 
once a scam artist always a scam artist....
Let the Board of Directors release the salaries and bonuses, if any, of the top 500 paid employees. Then we will all be able to see what the NYT believes a proper salary is from their own stand point before jumping all over a one of a kind exceptional experience of Obama's Presidency as seen from his point of view.  This is invaluable information for us today and our posterity. 
I thought Obama was going to go back to being a community organizer in Chicago. And the 'community organizer' stuff was not just a way to become a senator and president?<br/>But now as ex-president he is cavorting with billionaires on their yachts? How stupid of me? 
NYT joining the blame Obama brigade now?
So you expect ex-president Obama to set and have higher standards but not the current occupant of the White House.<br/>There are so much "bad stuffs", as 45 would say, happening now that are directly affecting our country that neede exposure than calling out Obama on a paid speech?! 
It's not how much money you make that matters; it's what you do with the money you make.
Dear President Obama: Although you're no longer in the White House, we need your moral leadership now more than ever. If you must accept a $400K speaking fee, please consider donating it to a charitable organization. Thank you.
It seems to me more than evident that President Obama had no input at all from any other party in his entire time as President.<br/>Let's not fall for the blaming and shaming of the altogether do-nothing Party of the so=called 'conservative" branch of government!
Who cares.<br/><br/>The last ex-President went home made paintings and spent all his time helping wounded vets. Much more noble.<br/><br/>Just please, please Mr. Obama, go away.
You've got to be kidding! We've got the most openly corrupt presidential administration and family right in front of us and you're complaining about Obama, after-the-fact, when he can't influence legislation and he has no products to sell, except maybe his books? Why can't he go on the speech-for-hire tour too? He didn't even throw up on his hosts and you're criticizing him for his speaker's fee? Other former presidents have gotten a million bucks and travel to other countries for their speeches. What's so different about Obama?
As many commenters have pointed out, Barack Obama is now a private citizen and he is entitled to make a living. My wife noted that his one evening of work will pay for his daughter's college education and then some. I am certain those of us helping our kids to pay tuition loans wish we were that fortunate. However, I do think it is time for ex-presidents who decide to cash in on their legacy to stop accepting a lifetime ride at the taxpayer's expense. There ought to be an income level at which ex-presidents pay for their own private security, medical care and expenses.
To add to an already posted comment: how ironic it is that the same voters who (likely) hoist Trump on a pedestal for his commercial successes (and $1.5M speaking fees <a href="http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/washingtons-highest-lowest-speaking-fees/story?id=24551590#1)" title="http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/washingtons-highest-lowest-speaking-fees/story?id=24551590#1)" target="_blank">http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/washingtons-highest-lowest-speaking-fees/...</a> will be quick to castigate President Obama for doing much the same?
NYT, I had almost given up on you. Thanks for going high on this one. Not in any way as a personal attack on the Obamas. But, rather, as a tough and concise appraisal of where we Democrats stand today. I'm tired of the pettiness. I have Trump rage fatigue. We have to focus inward to rebuild a party that people can believe in and vote into office. I'd like to see more discussions like this, and less about Russian hackers and where Melanie and Baron reside. The fact that most people have responded to this editorial by dismissing concerns about the speaking fee and continuing to pile on Trump depresses and even scares me. We can't all be that corrupt and jaded. I still believe in the Democratic Party as a better choice.
Democrats go on and on about Wall Street and too much money in politics but not if a Clinton or Obama is getting the money. Nice double standard going there.
65 million for a book!  Isn't that enough?  If he were true to what he preached, he would speak for free at non profits doing good and help the, raise money.  Imagine how much he could raise!
Readers who are defending Obama's "right" enrich himself with speaking fees are missing the point.<br/><br/>The problem is how it will resonate with voters who feel that the Democrats are not listening to them.<br/><br/>Obama let off the Wall Street felons who crashed the economy with mere fines, pocket change to them. Not one person was prosecuted.<br/><br/>And now he is accepting a fee equivalent to a worker's seven years of salary from a Wall Street firm. anyone who doesn't think this looks like a payoff is atone deaf as he is.<br/><br/>Stop defending his "right" to the fee, and start thinking about how this will hurt the Democratic Party among already disaffected voters.
You are worried about earning $400,000 for a speech when the current occupant of the White House has so many conflicts they can't be investigated? <br/><br/>Hypocrisy!
And Hillary got pilloried  for the same thing - whatever !
I'm amused the people who still think that obama was a progressive or even a liberal.
What is the concern?!?! He certainly demostrated "against all odds" that the American Dream is possible. <br/><br/>But, after taking the oath of office, he becomes just "another" president.
How strange that so many Americans and also many Democrats find the Democratic Party "out of touch" with the needs of ordinary people. Yet the poor GOP voters ( the ones who say the Dems are too rich and don't care about ordinary people) seem completely satisfied that the billionalre  in chief, liar in chief, who is spending the citizens' money on vacations in hotels that he owns, IS watching out for their interests. They obviously live on Planet Trump, and drank the koolaid long ago. Mr. Obama  should get what speaking fees he can, and use the money as he sees fit. Nothing he does will satisfy anyone ever; the GOP slander machine saw to that long ago (Kenyan birth, remember? The slander that boosted the current so-called president into the limelight, how he built his base). This is how the world works thanks to citizens United. And by the way, Hillary lost because of a lot of things, but I doubt speaking fees was a real issue; it was just one more thing that the alt-right and the GOP pushed into the mainstream in the concerted effort to destroy her. 
Its truly amazing at "We see what we want to see" NYT readers and those leaving the gleaming Obama comments. Fascinating, where have you people  been in the last 8 years of the most amazing crony capitalism ever displayed in the white house. i.e. the tech industry for starters followed by non stop wall street influence. The last eight years of non stop corruption from gun running in Mexico to massive political paybacks in the infamous "Stimulus" spending. Remember those shovel ready jobs. Huge joke on the american taxpayer but you folks were too busy reading about the Easter egg hunt with the Obamas. Nonstop roll outs of ever expanding government over reach bloated the EPA with ever increasing power with federal regs and land grab with out a peep from this paper or its readers. Never mind about Obama meddling in the Israeli election or the infamous disastrous display of foreign policy of Bengahzi. Lot of blood on the hands of Obama but that's not what we want to see is it? Americas elite Seal team dead and the shattered lives of their survivors. No big deal because bombastic Trump is the true villain of the day. $400 gran for a speech on what? How we need to share among ourselves so he and the elite can finish their globalist achievement program. The $400 gran like the Clinton's is about influence. Its the Democratic way these days. But never mind that put back on those shades nothing to see here folks but goodness.  
New York Times you need to set the example for the media, the United States and your readers by higher journalistic standards in you OP ED pieces by not coddling and normalizing hate, bigotry, greed, lies, conflict of interest, grifting, and open treason inherent in Trump and all members of his inner circle to include his family. You have time to criticize President Obama for earning a living as a private citizen...yet you yawn at the antics of Trump and his administration.  Shame on you New York Times. You have done this nation a disservice with your relentless criticism of good people like Hillary Clinton and her family and now you attack the Obama's.  The Clinton and Obama families have sacrificed and dedicated their lives to public service without committing Treason and stealing from the US Treasury. They have made people in the US lives better. This is far more than anyone in the Trump family and the current Republican Party have ever done for this Nation. Shame, Shame, Shame New York Times.  
These red-faced Rightists are having you on.<br/><br/>They know that $400,000 isn't even a respectable Christmas bonus on Wall Street.<br/><br/>And they should know that Bush the W has brought in over $15,000,000 in speaker's fees since leaving office.<br/><br/>It's kind of embarrassing when your sworn enemies don't even have the energy to tall a good lie anymore.<br/><br/>I think our relationship may be in trouble.
Dear Editorial Board,<br/>have you considered the tone deafness of your editorial? You are literally criticizing a black man for not being/acting better than a white man - which is the only term under which you will accept him.  Taking the high road for whom? He is not Jesus. He does not have to turn down money to save us.  
Funny that no one seems at all upset by an NFL quarterback making more than that for a two hour game.
Why should Obama observe moral standards any more Than previous presidents? The notion that he is or mar be holier than others is an attitude that others have ascribed to him not him ascribing this to himself. Do we really expect more morality from him because he was the first black president? Aere white unwittingly ascribing to qualities such as a super athlete or out sized sexual lothario or an overly religious believer? I find this quite interesting given the concern about his accepting a large sum of money is arrived at not by an individual but by an editorial board who apparently is trapped in racial stereotyping? 
Sitting presidents cannot take bribes so there they go post term collecting very handsome due from corporate elites who they looked after so generously in office
Good for Obama!  I hope he continues to speak and earn large fees for his speeches.  He served our county well.  Now it is his turn to live his life however he choses and earn however he choses.   When I hear any news about Obama, it makes me smile.  I miss Obama for his intelligence, his humor, his thoughtfulness, his careful decision-making, his empathy and his first-class manners.  We are currently living in a bipolar time of history... and it is clear the polar end we are now witnessing  is the complete opposite of what we had with Obama and his family.  History will remember Obama as a man who cared about this country and worked hard to make a difference in the world. 
When there's a thief holding the highest office, why NOT take all you can get?
Wow!<br/><br/>This is pretty close to FAKE NEWS what with the report on the other side of the page about the $120m supplementary appropriation for "security" costs related to the Trump(s) "lifestyle."<br/><br/>Oh, I see, Obama takes it from the private sector, while Trump takes it from the Treasury, i.e., the taxpayers.
I do not understand what Mr. Obama can that is worth $400,000. He is not teaching them to do some new thing nor is he revealing the secret formula for some desirable item.  A a matter fact, I do not understand why any speaker should be paid thist kind of money.  This is obscene.
What can do more to divide the nation than to refuse to talk with one another. Is it the money that makes if offensive? If they want to pay to hear him why not? He has no power; he is not in office.
What message is Obama sending to the children??
I always thought President Obama could live well on his governmental salaries, pensions &amp; book royalties. I guess I was wrong.
Why is this even an issue? Personally, I hope he makes as much as he can. <br/><br/>Can the Editorial Board focus on something more important? Get a life.
The NYTimes complaining about a black man being gainfully and legally employed.  The irony is rich.  
It would be one thing if he were still in office promoting, say, his family business' chocolate cake.  Now that would be bad optics and a true conflict to get riled up about.
2007: Obama: it's wrong , HIs supporters: That's my man!<br/>2017 Obama: I'm taking the money.  His supporters: That's my man!
Why is it always black folks who have to take the high road to remind America of what it is supposed to be? 
He really should donate 70% of his speaking fee. Think of 10 speeches at the tune of 400K... That's a lot of chump change. 
The New York Times is right to call out President Obama for cashing in on the office of the Presidency. In beating a quick path to Wall Street, he is following in the soiled footsteps of his chief economic advisers (Summers, Geithner, et al.), as well as his former Secretary of State.<br/><br/>It is risible to read the many comments on this editorial seeking to excuse him. I voted for the man twice, but make no mistake: Barack Obama's behavior in this instance is a textbook example of corruption.<br/><br/>Let's not pretend that this money is for giving a speech, either. It is payment for services rendered during the bailout (like Summers' no show, multi-million dollar gig at the D.E. Shaw hedge fund). <br/><br/>If you want to know why a Democratic administration bailed out Wall Street bankers, who caused the global financial crisis, while allowing millions of middle-class homeowners to go underwater on their mortgages, look no further than these corrupt payoffs.
Amen
So the first African American President retires, and the the media pile on him for making paid speeches -- just like every other modern President. Because if there's anything more galling to a journalist than seeing other people make a ton of money for just talking, it's seeing a black man make a ton of money for just talking.
How do we know he's not putting the $400k into his Foundation? Do we know that for sure? <br/><br/>People are making way too much of this speech payment. There's so many other people we can pound on ...Koch Brothers, Trump &amp; family, Rebekah Mercer and her father, Bannon, ETC on and on...that list is way too long. <br/><br/>Let's stop this picking on Obama for getting paid by Cantor Fitzgerald for a Health Conference speech. 
I never understood the idol worship of Obama, and frankly, just looking at him revolts me. Not because he is black, but for the same reason Bush Jr and B Clinton did, their obvious falseness. Obama strutting around like he is still president,,, it makes me sick.
Do NY Times writers, editors and executives give their salaries to charity? 
Obama is trying to set an example to Trump:  it's the ex-presidents that really cash in, and without any of the headaches.   So get out if the White House now!
It's not what you do that matters -- taking $400,000 from Wall Street -- as long as you can then tell your party base that Wall Street is bad.  The party base will believe whatever their Demi-God Barack says.  But, what would Bernie say? Haha.<br/><br/>Barack you are a supreme hypocrite. Hope you enjoy the cash golfing in Hawaii!
Does this man do anything right for anyone?  Leave him alone already.  He's earned the right to speak and be well paid.  I could care less when we have an incompetent crazy loon in the White House.   
I understand he's speaking on healthcare at a firm that lost many employees during the 9/11 attack.  He also worked incredibly hard during his eight years and spent less taxpayer dollars for all of his family vacations than Mr. Mar-A-Lago.<br/><br/>Besides, I would pay good money for honesty, which I know I would get from President Obama.  He makes me think of our first President, George Washington.  <br/><br/>The current oval office occupant lies like cheap worn-out rug, as such his speeches are worthless; you couldn't pay me enough to listen to his lies.
What is the problem. What will the 99% say if he turns it down. They'll say he's crazy. They'll say "more proof he doesn't represent us". They'll say "what's the harm at this point."  It's only elites asking this question. He's never said he was dumb. It's not hypocritical. He doesn't affect policy.  If it's that much of a concern, I would make the speech, and spend the money frivolously on blue collar workers via picnics or county fair admissions or something interesting with the money. If you're hellbent on him not profiting.  But saying no would only further the divide. Spend communally if it's a big deal. 
Faux-news.<br/><br/>Let the man rock on and let's see what he has to say.  If I had a chance to fleece those wall street types out of that sort of pocket change I'd do it in a heartbeat.  I think money is all they understand and by charging a good fee Obama is meeting them where they are:  What I say has value!!<br/><br/>You know they are talking about money -- what to do with it, what is the right way and wrong way to handle money, how money helps and hurts, the power of money in the world.  I don't find it dirty to handle money. <br/><br/>There is a certain formality in the situation.  He is hired to make a presentation, a consultation you might think of it.  There is no obligation on the part of the hiring company other than to pay the bill at the end of the event.  It seems very above board and clean. They are not huddling in a back room making some sorts of "deals" or plans. Or exchanging money in a quid pro quo fashion.  It's respectable to say "I expect nothing but my paycheck from you" and Wall Street to say "we expect nothing from you but your ideas."  Boom.
I try very hard, each day when I open the NYT on my computer to keep a level head. There is no love lost for Donald Trump on the pages of the Times, nor the comment section if the Times so decides to include one at the end of an article.  Yet, it is simply unbelievable that after President Obama railed against the 1%, the upper class, the rich and how they became rich, he now takes in retirement USD 400,000.00 for a Wall Street speech.  You know, when one talks the talk, they must also walk the walk and so the comments in this section are simply amazing.  " He deserves it".  "Who is he hurting", and so forth.  If it were the other way around, President Bush taking this money to speak or President Reagan, there would be a front page article, yet in this case, the article is simple a by-word, something that had to be said, yet not plastered on the front page of the Times.  Honestly, for a New Yorker like myself whose lived here all my life, who loves NY and the people, the sights and sounds, the music and the culture... how disdainful. 
Why? 60 mil not enough for you and Michelle? Repulsive behavior! Repulsive greedy - every single thing that's wrong with the Democratic party and politics all rolled into one. Disgusting unless he gives it away to say Planned Parenthood or some other liberal entity. Sickening, revolting, vomitus. 
I was quite taken by the fact that Obama made a bee line for black youth in Chicago as a roll out of his future leaders training. I thought, AMAZING, why didn't you do this when you were in office...as well the black community should ask? When he went on his poverty tour, he avoided the black neighborhoods!!! When he was in office he pretty much ignored blacks and placed emphasis on Hispanics!<br/>No book deal in the universe is work over $60 million!!! PLUS, his first 100 days out of office he has has TWO (2) speaking engagements totaling 800K!<br/>Pardon me for thinking that all of this is reimbursement for services rendered! SHAME!
Dear NYT Board Members: <br/><br/>Raul E. Cesan (1999),<br/>Hays Golden,(2017)<br/>Steve B. Green (2012)<br/>Dara Khosrowshahi (2015)<br/>Brian P. McAndrews (2012)<br/>Mark Thompson (2012)<br/>Rebecca van Dyck (2015)<br/>Robert E. Denham (2008)<br/>Michael Golden (1997)<br/>Joichi Ito (2012)<br/>James A. Kohlberg (2008) <br/>Arthur O. Sulzberger, Jr., (1997)<br/>Doreen A. Toben (2004)<br/><br/>I trust you stand united in your support of this Editorial - perhaps it represents GroupThink at its worst.  If you could re-read your piece with empathy for others not like you, from another's perspective wouldn't it be somewhat unseemly having a group of mainly white men, 2 white women and 1 Japanese-American representing the pillars of Wall Street led economy, to try scold, and dissuade our only black American President from pursuing the American Dream? If money does not define success in 21st century America, tell me what has?<br/><br/>Hasan Minhaj said yesterday maybe it’s because we’re living in this strange time where trust is more important than truth. The reason why the public distrust you is you don't represent us.  Avoid tilting at windmills when there is an urgency to stay laser-focused on the damage this presidency continues to wreak on our country.  <br/><br/>Do you think President Obama would have the same gravitas at his Wall Street speech if he accepted at $5,000 fee?  This is not the world in which you built your companies and careers so it should not be your place to foist a vow of poverty upon someone because he's not one of you.
The Times is obsessed about any possibility that some foreign dignitaries might stay in one of Trump's hotels and that he may profit from it and then they questions if a payment of $400,000 from a Wall Street firm for an Obama speech is OK? Of course it's not OK. What speech could possibly be worth that much? These guys are not idiots, they are buying influence from a former president in order to gain some special advantage. This should be illegal.
Jealous much?<br/>Or would it be OK if he were stiffing contractors for a living?
It's truly amazing to read all the comments from (what I assume are many) liberals defending our pay-to-play, revolving door bribery system.<br/><br/>After the 2008 Great Recession, caused by what is in an essence a "Wall Street Criminal Racketeering Cartel," (WSCRC) I soon realized that I had been deceived with a meaningless "Hope &amp; Change" slogan.  Shame on me, once.<br/><br/>Once I saw his administration not only wasn't going to follow the law and properly investigate (and when warranted) criminally prosecute alleged scammers and law breakers in Wall Street, BUT also actively protect these (alleged) criminals, I realized that Obama was in WSCRC's pockets. <br/><br/>When one puts it all together, including a huge increase in heartless rounding up of undocumented immigrants for deportation (breaking up hundreds of thousands of families), ramping up assassinations using drones (a possible war crime?), an nationwide coordinated crackdown on Occupy Wall Street, appointing (whom I believe are) Wall Street crooks to his administration, and the refusal to properly investigate and prosecute (alleged) Wall Street criminals, war criminals, torturers, I knew Obama was going to end up representing the worst thing that could have happened to the progressive movement.<br/><br/>Because of this malfeasance, the country (or much of it) turned to a fascist demagogue (now  in the Oval Office).<br/><br/>Thanks Obama!
We are a capitalistic society. What we value, we pay for. <br/><br/>For all of you saying "well there must be a quid pro quo." Yes. Most certainly. The QUID PRO QUO in this case being THEY PAY HIM. HE WILL GIVE THE SPEECH. That's what they are GETTING FOR THEIR $400,000. They get to say that Obama spoke to them. Just like someone who pays Elton John to perform gets to say "I had Elton John perfom." Do we think Elton owes people who hire him other than the performance he delivers? Then why do we think that of any other "performer?" <br/><br/>I run a very well-respected and effective social-entreprenurial non-profit. I now can charge $5,000 for a speech. The people who pay me that amount are often the very people who need to hear my message the most and whom we most need to sway in order to create a more equitable and inclusive world. It doesn’t mean I’m selling out to capitalize on my assets. It means I’m a good steward of my resources.<br/><br/>This idea that Obama isn't supposed to receive value for his time commensurate with his positions, etc. is pernicious and should be shot down immediately. The assumption that there is something else being traded--other than just his time--is offensive. Why is Obama supposed to be above receiving value for the value he provides? Why do we assume that he isn't being pursuasive and using the platform to argue for a more just and humane world? <br/><br/>This is really about a ridiculous and unfair double standard.
Oh please. How much does the Executive Editor of the Times make? The vow of poverty is for monks. To give speeches you need a booking agency. They charge the going rate. This was the going rate. And do you know how he's going to spend his ill-gotten gains? By the way, how much are you paying the execrable Bret Stephens? Spare me the righteousness. 
Obama was always a plutocrat. Nothing has changed now that he is a private citizen. In real life, the core of the Democratic party is massively pro-inequality, pro-poverty, anti-worker, and pro-financialization. A few quotes should help here.<br/><br/>"And it's not surprising then they get bitter, they cling to guns or religion or antipathy to people who aren't like them or anti-immigrant sentiment or anti-trade sentiment as a way to explain their frustrations."<br/><br/>That was Obama speaking at a fundraiser on Billionaires (no mere millionaires for Obama) row in San Francisco. So what has Obama done for these people? Imported more immigrants to take their jobs and trade deals to get rid of any remaining jobs.<br/><br/>Of course, that would be the same Obama who appointed Timothy Geithner as his Secretary of the Treasury.<br/><br/>Let's try Hillary.<br/><br/>"I can certainly run for the Senate seat in Punjab and win easily"<br/><br/>This was a fundraiser sponsored by corporate outsourcers.<br/><br/>"This TPP sets the gold standard in trade agreements to open free, transparent, fair trade, he kind of environment that has the rule of law and a level playing field.".<br/><br/>If anyone doubts that Hillary (and the Democratic party in general) represent the plutocracy, just look at the New York Times. Don't waste your time on the articles or even the editorials. Look at the adds. The NYT is written for the 1% (or really 0.1%).<br/>Are the Republicans any better? Except for Trump that are just as bad, if not worse.
If Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders think it is a bad idea for this dude to accept $400,000 from people representing "top1% or so of income scale", then who are we to disagree with them?<br/><br/>Come to think of it,  Obama would not got this speaking fee offer if he did not serve as the president of the USA. So, he owes all of us to RELEASE THE TRANSCRIPT OF HIS SPEECH so that we can determine whether he was using a harsh tone toward the wealthy folks or cozying up to them.
I think he's simply less visionary than many make him to be. He may have read the great Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and listened to his speeches, and even shared the great Nobel achievement with him, but his actions send the message that his thoughts were less about forwarding justice and equality and more about forwarding the American agenda as seen by his party.  Perhaps he can't be too heavily faulted for doing the job that the party worked so hard to help him win, but now that the job is done his lack of vision for what he can do now is going to hurt him unless he starts really challenging himself.  It's early and there's still time. We can hope that he gets it right soon.
While Obama's post-presidency speech fee and Trump's in-presidency wealth-seeking are very different, many people will (wrongly) equate the two as "cashing in on the presidency".  They will then excuse what Trump does.  Obama shouldn't ignore this reality.
"For the first time in memory, Democrats are seen as more out of touch with ordinary Americans than the party’s political opponents. "<br/><br/>The Dem's more out of touch than the GOP that wants to gut the ACA? Sheesh, if that's the case then the problem is that the DNC doesn't know how to promote its message, not one of Mr. Obama's speaking fees.
His 'fee is high and his moral compass has been unparalleled compared to anyone.<br/>Let Wall Street learn from a brilliant humanistic leader who might have a profound impact at that event
The Obamas set a higher standard while in office, and that standard was rejected by those who voted for Trump or failed to vote at all. He owes the public no more standard setting.
Politicians of every stripe--once they reach the upper echelon of American politics--all seem to suffer from an elitist tone deafness. Sadly, Barack Obama is not immune. It is nothing short of a travesty that he is going to accept $400,000 for a speech and not immediately give it all to charity. 
Where's the outrage when the entire trump family uses the office to make money at our expense!
You let Trump get away with pummeling Hillary Clinton on this common practice, and now you have truly lost perspective.  Who is Obama hurting here?  I wish you had gone after Trump's conflicts of interests with such vigor before the election and how he would rake it in at the expense of the common good through his presidency. 
I miss the elegance, grace, intelligence, and humor that the Obamas shared with America every day. I do not begrudge Mr. Obama a speaker’s fee. He has earned access to the wealthy. As a private citizen who does not come from inherited wealth, he needs to earn a living to support himself, his family, and the good works he will undoubtedly do in his post-presidency. <br/><br/>As a speaker, one sets one’s fee based on the value that the speech brings to the audience as well as to the ability of those extending the invitation to pay. In my mind, $400K for a speech to Wall Street may undervalue the influence that Mr. Obama may have on his audience. He is not betraying his values, but shows his understanding of what others value. <br/><br/>However, let’s talk about values. I do wish the NYT editors would spend less time on Mr. Obama’s speaker’s fee and more on the lies and ignorant bluster that comes out of the White House daily. You let us down during the election cycle, allowing the dumbing down of the discourse to go unchecked until the very end, and poking jabs at Mrs. Clinton’s campaign with a false pretense of fairness. Stop thinking that you are playing fair when you normalize the hypocrisy, poor language, and unsteadiness of the current White House while bothering to write an editorial on Mr. Obama’s well-earned speaker’s fees. I have no doubt that the Obamas are not greedy and they will remain lights for all who value truth during this darkening time. 
I am a very liberal democrat and see absolutely no problem with this. I am astounded to see the amount of people saying this is a terrible thing to happen. Obama is being paid $400,000 as a retired President to give a speech. If someone is willing to pay the man that much to hear him talk, all the more power to him. He is not giving any one any favors, not making any political promises, not doing anything other than giving a speech. I would imagine this is one of the perks of being such an accomplished person as he is, you get paid to talk and give your opinion, after all, you are a retired President. There is nothing illegal about people paying you to talk. It doesn't mean either that he has lost sight of his values or what is in the best interest of this country, which is astoundingly the conclusion a lot of people seem to be jumping to here. Accepting money to give your opinion or speak to a audience is absolutely fine. 
I am disappointed that I man I admire and respect wants to spend his time picking up a large fee talking to Wall Street when he could have hit the lecture circuit at universities and talked to the next generation of leaders; that would have been a better use of his abilities and time.
Aren't we just a tad self-righteous today? 
A remarkable, brave editorial from the NY times about the moral consequences of a leading progressive cashing in from Wall Street. Even more remarkable are the comments from wealthy progressives who think they can cash in too and still be the moral leaders of the nation. Well, they can't, and all their moral hectoring about income inequality falls on deaf ears. Far more thanTrump, U.S. voters feel that the Democratic Party does not have their interests at heart. Now we see why.
Your disdain (and jealousy) of the successful has rarely been more apparent.
As if anyone on the planet would refuse $400,000 to give a speech. Mr. Obama doesn't owe anybody anything.
I don't subscribe to the Times to listen to your moralizing. I do so to get informed, fact based news and insights.<br/>Back to the basics, please, and let President Obama choose how to live his life
Rich white men telling other people they don't deserve to compensated by Wall Street and that it is their duty to set a higher standard... Every. Single. Day.
It's got to be a gut punch to the progressive liberals who bought into Obama's harangues against crony capitalism, Wall Street 'fat cats' and corporate interests.  Little did we know he was just jealous and looked forward to the day he could get a 'piece of the action.'  I'm sure he will have many more pay days--Michelle too.  Don't go looking for the Obamas to start driving a Prius because global warming and climate change is the biggest threat to future generations.  All the sacrifices and taxes he called for are for the regular people like us.  This behavior shouldn't surprise anyone.
I'm very disappointed to learn that he's going to Wall Street of all places to make a speech and take $400k.  He sent no one to jail for the financial crisis and now it appears they are repaying him for the favor.  This looks really bad for him.
How does corporate influence work? It works when politicians are given huge sums of money both BEFORE they enter office and AFTER. It's called "half up front, half upon completion" which is standard practice in business. We all know this model. We all know why it's bad in government, even if an individual like Obama seems strong minded enough to not be evil. We all know that's besides the point, and it's a terrible part of our system. Why defend it? How is that helpful?<br/><br/>The pushback against this criticism, from fellow self-described "liberals" is truly disappointing and demoralizing. I have been a democrat all my life, under the belief that my fellow democrats more or less agreed with big liberal brass rings like getting money out of politics, opposing corporate hegemony, good governance, national healthcare, etc. For the first time in my life, I feel beyond repulsed not just with Democratic establishment leaders (DLC types have always been awful) but my actual fellow democratic voters.<br/>The arguments are dishonest to an extreme I never expected to hear from "liberals". Nobody has claimed Obama 1) doesn't have the legal RIGHT to take this money, 2) can't make lots of money in general, 3) is evil or 4) should be held to a different standard than white Presidents. Yet every defense rests of one of these flagrant strawman arguments, to the point where you have to suspect the dishonesty is purposeful.
There is a reason our constitution limits the term of a president to four years and  two terms for a total of eight years in office. The office corrupts the individual.
Could not agree more.  He should have anticipated -and avoided- the obvious negative impression.  Let's hope he doesn't become just another money-focused fat cat.
If those running the Democratic party want to rebuild they have to put some distance between themselves and the vultures on Wall Street.  Taking $400,00 will not do the Democratic party any good in November.
maybe he plans on giving it to worthy causes. Did you ask him?
Dear Editors, it is rumoured that each of Trump's golfing trips to Florida costs about $3 million. Why the rending of garments over Mr Obama's speaking fee? (Anything to do with the latter's deeper tan?)
If Obama was foolish enough to follow Hillary by leaping into the same minefield, he certainly deserves every bit of criticism he has drawn for this speech.<br/><br/>All the hand wringing in these comments really falls flat. The man is already rich. He is renting a home that costs $22,000 a month. He just spent months vacationing all over the world with the rich and famous.<br/><br/>What he is saying by taking this speaking gig is that he is among the 1 percent and proud of it: A Cadillac Communist!<br/><br/>I thought much, much better of him.
Because he needs money for his foundation.  Who better to take it from?
Jimmy Carter, once again is a cut above the rest... 
"As a couple and a family, the Obamas brought grace, empathy and high standards to their time in the White House, in stark contrast to the workaday vulgarity of its current occupants."<br/><br/>Bias much? Pathetic, blind hero-worship much?<br/><br/>And the MSM wonders why we the people increasingly regard them as irrelevant, purveyors of "fake news"
This editorial is particular unfair, suggesting that President Obama, who is extremely marketable, should sacrifice his legitimate right to earn a living for some sanctimonious principal.  Why shouldn't President Obama who worked extremely hard for relatively little remuneration give this speech.  The marketplace values him at this level.  I seriously doubt that he will be corrupted or his values changed.  And it may prove useful or didactic for the investment bankers attending his speech to hear what he has to say. 
What a ridiculous complaint.  An important historical figure, a former  president, a smart and talented man has the right to earn as much money as he can command. So what?
Obama was always in the pocket of Wall Street and now he's getting paid for having been so.  Bad optics?  It looks bad because it is bad.
Typical Obama- all rhetoric. At the end of the day the we are all capitalists.
Meanwhile Trump and his gang ravish the taxpayer-paid-for Treasury and the standard of living of all of us!  ($2 MILLION A MONTH alone for transport to and 'security' at his private Xanadu--Mar a Stinko!)<br/><br/>Another lost-in-the-woods opinion piece from the newspaper who endlessly dwelt on Benghazi and e-mail while Trump was stealing the election in cahoots with Russia and patently guilty of massive fraud and tax-evasion as a 'businessman'!
He gave us 8 glorious scandal-free years for which I am very grateful. While I hope he can find a way to join in to help us right our ship as soon as possible, I do not consider this his responsibility. But I do think it important that he acknowledges that he is in the ship with us. He has said the words, but his actions aren't there yet. 
So a black man who served our nation well for eight years is not entitled to the same compensation as his white peers? 
Is it a betrayal that the Democratic politician who rails against wealth in politic and most publicly outed Obama for his $400K speaking fee received a $575K advance for a recent book she wrote? <br/><br/>I think both she and the Times, has bigger fish to fry at this point in time given the workaday vulgarity of the current occupants of the White House. <br/><br/>This red herring can wait. 
President Obama demonstrated and upheld the highest standards of integrity, intelligence, wisdom, and compassion in both his personal and public life while in office. Given what we have in the White House today, the exact opposite of Obama, it's ludicrous and infuriating that The NY Times has the audacity to waste print space to criticize President Obama for his speaking fees. He's earned them, many times over for goodness sakes! Focus on Trump!!
The optics are good, if by optics we mean 20/20 vision. The coporatists had their talons in President Obama from the get go. The 1% got richer under his presidency, students got poorer, and the sugar industry got to Michelle as well. 
I can point to dozens of CEOs who made more in 6 months than Obama did in 8 years with a far more important job.   A little perective please.  
I posted earlier that I didn't much care if Mr Obama took this money or not b/c, so what, I don't want a saint as my go-fer (POTUS is a go-fer), I only want someone who can do the job (he couldn't)<br/><br/>But we replay the entire presidency, here, and lose whatever issue is involved, why is Mr Obama obliged to turn down money<br/><br/>( and he did get a $60m book deal, which for me is clear bonus money, no book earns $60m , so does he need the money? <br/><br/>maybe his new life is lonely, he said his campaigns brought him to rich people (um why was that, was he their gofer?))<br/><br/>I don't care, just that $400k to tip the errand boy seems a lot of money to me, oops go-fer<br/><br/>and Ms Obama seems to have expensive tastes, or does it only seem that way
Okay...I'm not happy about Pres Obama accepting lavish amounts of money for speeches and books, but I don't take that stuff too seriously.  Maybe he's paying for a past three months of vacation(s)!  Anyway, since the average pro football player makes $2 million annually, pro hockey players $3 million, pro baseball $4 million, and pro basketball players $5 million - I don't worry too much about it.  Especially, when the higher paid players all make over $10 million and the highest paid pitcher makes $215 million.  So...it all looks bad for regular folks like us who have to watch their budgets, but in America, money is a reward.  Besides that, listening to an Obama speech is worth a million times more than listening to the garbage spewing forth from the mouth of #45. 
This is such a gut reaction on my part, but here it is: go for it.<br/><br/>I want this 'pathbreaking' -- great word usage NYTimes! -- President and his amazing wife/First Lady to fully reap what they sowed.<br/>What they earned.<br/>What they deserve after having to suck it up and turn the other cheek to every sort of vile, vicious and ghastly slur and innuendo flung at them, from DJT to that looney small-town woman mayor or councilwoman, who took a particularly galling swipe at Mrs. Obama post-election, and everything/everyone in between.<br/><br/>They are brilliant, highly educated, incredibly articulate, young, attractive and vital individuals who have every right to turn this post-presidency into ... exactly what they wish, up to and including what every white ex-Prez (minus the amazing Jimmy Carter) has done for decades. <br/><br/>I want them, for all of the above reasons, AND as African-Americans, from humble family beginnings, to build significant, generational wealth. I want their children, and their children's children to be secure.<br/>You know -- like white families of prominence and name recognition have been doing ... forever. <br/><br/>And one day, maybe, they will sit with the like of Warren Buffet and Bill Gates, etc., and pledge to give most of it away. Maybe. Again, it would be refreshing to see a black presence in that group.<br/><br/>FWIW, I'm a white Boomer from Wisconsin, still trying to figure out my state's despicable choice last Nov. 
I mean I f You are living in USA, If you watched LA 92 recently.<br/><br/>You can only think that  Obama's  400.000 USD earning criticism is just another example of  racial discrimination , period. <br/><br/>I believe NYT editorial board  needs to think this issue  a little bit more, Nothing Obama does anymore  interest Democratic party's future, another period. 
One of the things I liked about Obama was that he seemed to be much more of a "class act" than his peers.... This $400k speaking gig does, for me, detract from that impression.<br/><br/>Since it is safe to assume he will never again serve in public office, it cannot be viewed as corrupt in any way. But I do find it distasteful. It's like some guy who hires the Rolling Stones for his kid's bar mitvah... It does not reflect well on any of the participants.
A simple suggestion....next time you wag your finger at someone for shamelessly sucking up to the one percent, avoid the Bvlgari add splashed across the top of the article.
He was President for 8 years. His speeches and time are in high demand. Some folks can and want to pay him for them. What, exactly, is the problem? It is striking to compare the amount of time devoted to this vs., say, the innumerable and very real conflicts of interest of the Trump Administration. And reminds me of the fake scandals surrounding the Clinton Foundation. Looks like standards are indeed very different for one side only.
I find this $400,000 speech deal disturbing and sad. It is so unnecessary and reinforces the value system of both his successor in the White House and Wall Street that enough is never enough when it comes to money. Mr. Obama's actions still influence the way many young people see the world. This is not a good message.
I am a conservative and therefore am 100% ok with the free market transactions between Mr O and whomever he chooses.  What I am not OK with is the 200K pension he (and W, Bill, etc..)gets from the taxpayers.  I think the 65 M will cover the electricity bill for a while.  I good gesture would be for all the former presidents to decline that income in the name of fiscally sound governance.
I volunteered on Obama's campaign, and I never, ever felt embarrassed by him--until now. Even if he gives the money away, Wall Street thinks it's getting something for its money, and I do, too. It might only be good will. It might only be Obama being a little less likely to criticize financiers, or a little less progressive in his outlook, or a little less likely to support true progressives.<br/>Does anyone think Cantor Fitzgerald would pay Bernie Sanders even $400 to speak to them? Of course not. Obama may have some very trenchant things to say, even some critical things, but they will be dignified and reasoned enough to not make his audience squirm, and the people in that audience will know, I'm afraid, that their money talks to him.<br/>Mr. President, I miss you terribly. Everyone makes mistakes,but this is a big one.
Good thing Obama didn't prosecute Wall Street executives -- if he had, then probably he would not be having a $400,000 payday.
I bet he's paying taxes on that income.  Now that's a reality check isn't it?
Respectfully, the Editorial Board should concern itself with weightier issues facing the country and the world.
Given that we don't know what he will or will not do with the money, I think it's a bit early to be this judgmental.  Regardless, the 8 years of defamation and abuse he took as President certainly affords him the leeway to set his family up for generations to come, in my opinion.  I don't begrudge people who actually have something meaningful to say making money off of it.
Doesn't bother me a bit. He suffered through 8 years of non-ending attacks and kept being judicious and honest. What he's doing is not dishonest--as you noted. Perhaps you should see if this is constant behavior or where the money will go or whether President Obama would have received LESS criticism if he hadn't done this.  No, doesn't bother me a bit. He's still classier than other former presidents.
The only thing crazier than paying someone - anyone - $400,000 for a speech would be turning it down.  <br/><br/>President Obama is now a private citizen and is free to do whatever he wants.  I agree with those who suggest that this is actually a good opportunity for him to try to influence the "Wall Street" attendees at his speech.  And perhaps also donate his fee to support causes dedicated to helping the poor, the powerless, and other groups that are most often damaged by Wall Street excess.  
Hmmm.  $65 million for writing a book works out to over $1 million per week, if the book is done in a year...  Or  $250,000 per day, for four-day weeks... Most consultants or speakers charge higher rates for single events than they do for for longer-term projects. Seeing it this way, Obama is just barely compensated by spending a day (plus much more time in preparation!) speaking to groups like this for $400 K.<br/>I just wish George R. R. Martin would take the (likely way over $65 million) money and write those next few books!
In spite of the fact that every President except Jimmy Carter has taken this route, I am somewhat disappointed and dismayed with his action.  Will the money (fee) go into his foundation?  Will it serve some greater purpose than just enrichment?  I hope so.  Considering the person (including family) currently despoiling our White House and our National image, former President and Mrs. Obama could be a guiding light in the coming dark days.
The editorial is right to say Obama should give this to his foundation where it can  be used to make a positive difference and to improve the lives of the 99%. 
I'm tired of politicians capitalizing on the privilege of elected public service.  I think former president Obama would do well to accept a nominal honorarium for speaking--especially to a member of Wall Street, to which he was beholden throughout his presidency due to its out-of-proportion support of his campaigns.  As for giving his speech fee to an Obama foundation, which as a tax-exempt body would shelter income, I don't think that sufficiently solves the problem of an excessive fee.  It would be ideal if Mr. Obama would reinvent a more democratic standard for post-elective-service speaking fees.
He spoke to Cantor-Fitzgerald, the firm that took the biggest hit of 9/11. The owner of that company gave money to the victims families and provided their health insurance for 10 years.<br/>I don't remember hearing complaints about any other president making money after their term ended. In fact, I remember George W Bush saying something about filling the family coffers after leaving office.<br/>I also thought making money is the American dream. Or is that only for Republicans.<br/>Mr. Obama brought dignity and grace to the office of president. I'm sure he will continue his life's work in the same manner.
Obama did not take an oath of poverty as a consequence of serving as a president forgoing all monetary gain from his position after leaving office. This is another case of position making it possible to make money. $400,000 for a speech and your editorial calls it a sell out? How much money does a major league baseball player make, a NFL quarterback, a rock star who does a concert at Madison Square Garden, not to mention the wealth accrued by the owner/publishers of The New YorK Times over the years. Sell out or just making money based on what he is worth in the market place? Do you think he should take an oath of poverty and walk the earth with a begging bowl for the rest of his life, giving speeches for free? What about the $650,000 speech Hillary gave to a closed meeting on Wall Street?
I won't blame him for taking paid speech opportunities, as long as that's not all he does. It's not a bad thing to speak to those in positions of influence; they are, after all, in a position to bring about positive change. I expect that the Obamas will also make an effort to stay in touch with those they've talked about serving. Let's let some time pass and get a larger sample size of their post-presidency before we rush to judgment.
How puzzling.<br/>No mention of China paying Ronald Reagan $2,000,000.<br/>Explanation, please.
I've been pro Obama for ten years. I tend to resolve most close calls in his favor. I'm not offended by $400,000 for a speech he'll probably spend 20 hours working on to prepare.<br/><br/>The Editorial does not mention the subject matter of the speech. I believe its Health Policy. It doesn't mention who's paying. I believe its a bond trading firm,<br/>Cantor Fitzgerald.<br/><br/>Given the amount, the subject and the sponsor, I'm not offended.
He should be paid more!<br/>I don't think he's going to live in a penthouse apartment in NY with gilded furniture.<br/>His words of wisdom, equality and honesty need to be heard thru out the world, and the Obama Foundation will reflect his goodwill and generosity.<br/>Our job as citizens is to respect his initiative and support his goals of empowering the next generation to be thoughtful, competent leaders.<br/>We still have much to learn from him.
Thanks for this editorial focus on Obama's betrayal of the 99% of us. The costs of Obama's sell out of the American people can be measured in deaths, injuries and dollars. During the Obama years alone in just the auto safety realm more than 250,000 Americans lost their lives, about 1 million suffered serious injuries, and losses valued at nearly $3 trillion using government values. During all 8 Obama years citizens pleaded for greater regulatory action to little avail. See <a href="https://www.careforcrashvictims.com/blog/nhtsa-chief-counsel-under-obama-goes-through-revolving-door-to-guess-where/" title="https://www.careforcrashvictims.com/blog/nhtsa-chief-counsel-under-obama-goes-through-revolving-door-to-guess-where/" target="_blank">https://www.careforcrashvictims.com/blog/nhtsa-chief-counsel-under-obama...</a>
I'd like to think that if I had just made $65m on twin book deals I'd be high minded and turned down the $400k speech. But I know myself...
The Democratic Party should enter the political arena with one arm tied behind its back, according to the editors at the NY Times.<br/>It is the exploitation of the rules to their limits, and changing those rules (and voting boundaries) to their immediate benefit which have allowed a party representing a MINORITY of the population to ascend to the pinnacle of power in this nation. In NC, a party imbalance of only a few percent (as measured in state-wide races such as governor(Dem!), senator,president) has resulted in 2 Democratic US House representatives of 13 total. It is the indifference to precedent and ethics within the rules that have allowed the leadership within our nation to be hijacked by a vocal minority (which has become an electoral majority).<br/>President Obama, I believe even his GOP detractors will agree, gives great speeches. In a free marketplace of speakers, President Obama would be the #1 draft choice of anyone looking for a marquee' speaker for their group (even without a "product" endorsement). They would be assured of a thoughtful, considered, HIGHLY ATTENDED, and entertaining presentation to their group.<br/>The sudden attention to President Obama's income stream (in contrast to the lagging interest in the "transparency' of President Trump's continuing enterprises) appears to be mere clickbait for those who want to grab the eyes of those haters looking for something to hate for.<br/>Sad, I thought the Old Grey Lady was on a new path.
All you people taking up for Obama just don't get it. <br/><br/>Obama's early writings were just the beginning of his populist posturing. Then Rahm Emanuel and David Axelrod (look up Rahm's past deep ties to the underbelly of Wall Street and Axelrod's advertising agency) got hold of him, embellished and packaged the product, and sold millions of us on the premise that Obama was determined to fight for students and the working class. The first thing Obama did was appoint the "Fast Cats" (Paulson, Geithner, et al) to his cabinet.<br/><br/>The thing that still puzzles millions of us is what are the main reasons he never really did anything of substance to make a real difference for the poor and middle class. <br/><br/>Did he never fully realize how much power he had? (See Trump's list of Executive Orders in 100 days).<br/><br/>Was his core personality so weak and timid that he just wasn't up for it, intimidated by the aggressiveness of the opposition?<br/><br/>Was he so infatuated by the money and power of the 1% that he would do anything to be one of them, along with a desire to rise above his humble upbringings? (He once said that Jamie Dimon was someone he admired the most).<br/><br/>Whatever the reasons, probably a combination of them, he never REALLY fought for us. Just lots of pretty words and always the charmer. Millions of us have figured it out, and a few million others were so fed up that they voted for another product who told them what they wanted to hear.<br/><br/>Obama's legacy?<br/><br/>He's sitting in the White House.
Perhaps Obama is speaking for $400,000 so that he can speak for free at other worthy nonprofits. In any case, he is just doing what ex-presidents do. Though a reported $16 million dollar contract for books by him and Michelle should be enough but who are we to say? I never held him to the high standard some Democrats tend to as I sensed he was no longer the man I admired in his early campaigns. I don't expect him to be Jimmy Carter but I continue to admire Jimmy. 
I remember when I was younger and more naïve, back when W was President, reading The Audacity of Hope and being absolutely thrilled that the author of such a book could possibly become President.  It's made it that much more  disappointing now to realize that these politicians are all the same.  Why should we be surprised that Obama is cashing in?  It's not like he banished Goldman Sachs employees from key government posts.  One of the two reasons I couldn't vote for Hillary Clinton was that she wouldn't make public the text of the speeches she delivered for the financial industry.  Then, when they were leaked, we found out she basically told the bankers that when campaigning she paid lip service to what the people wanted to hear, but she and the bankers knew better and in practice that's what she would follow.  The other reason I couldn't vote for Hillary was because she voted for the war.  And no, I didn't facilitate Trump's victory, I'm reside in Massachusetts.
Why would a company pay Obama so much for a single speech?  Is it payback?  Does the Wall St company get $400,000 in value out of it?  If some other group paid a fee like this, would that be a problem?  Are we concerned about only the amount?  Or do we suspect there is something else wrong with such a payment?  Is this worse than a boxer being paid $400,000 for a single bout?  Is this worse than an entertainer being paid $400,000 for a single night?<br/><br/>Are we jealous of the listeners who hear something they can take financial advantage of and we can't?  Are we jealous of the idea that the Wall St business gets to take advantage of this speech night and we can't, ourselves?<br/><br/>What if he got only $10,000?  Would that be a problem?  What is the difference in our thinking between giving a speech for $10,000 and giving one for $400,000?<br/><br/>I think this whole thing is a non-issue, perpetrated by people who have something against the man and people who just don't think about it.  <br/><br/>He was elected President of the US because people thought he was the single person best qualified to make decisions for our country.  That must have qualified him for many other things.  How many of us would want the US government to pay him $400,000 a day to make the decisions for the US instead of any other person in the US, beginning right now?
As a tremendous fan of President Obama, I agree with the NYT's sentiment here.  A simple fix is that these fees go toward his charitable foundation.  While it is true that there is hypocrisy in challenging another person's right to earn money - is the NYT ready to share editorial board salaries, or their book deal proceeds or the like, so that we may question whether its members are overpaid  - there is no doubt that the appearances associated with this speaking fee for this group are not pretty.  Something tells me that he will rethink how he handles such fees in the future.
I think it is more important to see what former President Obama does with that $400,000 than the fact that he made them. Through financial sponsorship, he can personally accomplish a great deal to further the causes he supported as President.
The fee does seem extravagant, but President Obama has the inside track on the world right now and I would sure like to hear what he has to say about many things. Maybe he will use the fee to help support his foundation and to do good things-time will tell.
The Democratic Party Elite after November 2016: Business As Usual.<br/><br/>Supping at the Wall Street feed trough fresh back from a vacation with billionaires is no way to win middle American in the 2018 elections, or any future elections. The tone deafness of Obama is absolutely unbelievable--and I voted for the man twice (my first two Democratic Party Presidential votes since I started voting in 1976!)<br/><br/>Senators Warren and Sanders: FORM A VIABLE THIRD PARTY! <br/><br/>The DNC does not care about the average women and man in middle America, on Main Street. They are hopelessly out of touch. To me, at this point, a vote for the Democratic Candidate now seems like a wasted vote.<br/><br/>You will gladly get my vote and campaign donations if you form a THIRD PARTY that actually pays attention to the common citizen first! YOU WILL THEN HAVE MORE SUCCESS WITH SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE ISSUES IF YOU DO--THIS IS NOT ROCKET SCIENCE HERE (I know Warren and Sanders understand this--but it must be continually shouted out...or we will get Mr. Trump for Four More!)<br/><br/>Michael Bain<br/>Glorieta, New Mexico
I have no problem with him cashing in on the presidency AFTER his term. Cashing in on being president while in office though is unacceptable. Are you listening DJT?
Hillary was, indeed, tainted by her corporate connections. It was more than the money. It was the attitude she held. She - regardless of who she may have been when she was at Yale - was entitled and showed only token respect to people of lesser means. Both power and money are corrupting and she and Bill did not have the character to overcome that pull. While Obama may do a bit better, it will be because of the stigma he has experienced as a person of color, nothing else. He was easily influenced by the 1% while in office (a Grand Bargain that included messing with the security of others' need for Social Security was a textbook example). I see no compelling reason to believe that will end.<br/><br/>Bernie Sanders has not cashed in on his office. Unlike most in Congress, he was not a millionaire when was first elected and he won't be when he is done. He is a person of integrity to the core. That is the reason people all across the political spectrum trust and like him. The NYT, could not repeat the Clinton smears against him fast enough, all the while promoting Trump's campaign by having him "above the fold" daily. <br/><br/>I frankly do not see where you get the gall to write this article. You, too. are corrupted by being too close to the 1%. You eat the crumbs at their table and drink their champagne and delude yourself that you are not one of the masses. Well, no doubt the owners of the paper aren't. Most of he writers and reporters are. They need to remember that.
    The Editorial Board writes as if the $400,000 speaking fee was received while he was in office.  Moreover, the Editorial Board does not know what Obama plans to do with that money or with his time.  It is possible that he will do good works for the poor and disenfranchised.<br/>    What other private citizens do you chastise for making big money?
Whop de do.  He's a private citizen and had next to nothing to his name when he was elected.  While he does get a retirement it's not exactly lavish.  He's entitled to make a living just like anyone else.
The question I hear everyone asking is 'why is he taking this money?' But perhaps a more pertinent question would be 'what will he be doing with the money?' <br/><br/>Because won't it change our perception if he is using the payment to fund his foundation and the, presumably, good works it does or will do? And should he be expected to pay for that work out of his own pocket, deep as they reportedly are? Even the millions their book is reported to be bringing the Obamas would run out quickly if it were to be used to fund a foundation. <br/><br/>Or perhaps he plans to give the money to a charity? <br/><br/>Of course, he may be planning to simply pocket the cash, but none of us will know unless he's asked and I haven't heard anyone asking him. 
I can't believe how completely tone-deaf so many of those commenting here are.  And the huge numbers of readers who are recommending these obtuse comments. If this is representative of the current run of Democrats aligned with the Obama/Clinton wing of their party, we are in for a rough time. Forget 2018 and 2020. Democrats will never dump Trump if almost half the Democratic voters in the country continue to feel their own  party is "out of touch with the American people," as this well argued editorial point out.
A stereotype many on the right have of the left is that money and wealth are resented no matter how honestly obtained.    <br/><br/>You just do not have very strong arguments as to why this is bad other than noting that Hillary Clinton was also unfairly attacked for this.    If you were advising a candidate then saying "some will view this badly" may be good advice.   But here you are more advising the public about how they should view it, and there is no actual reason to condemn it.
Once again, Mr Obama is being asked to carry other people's burden. How often has it been said that part of the attraction of the white working class to Trump is that he is wealthy and they hope he will do for them what he has done for himself? This may be naive, but a majority of Americans are not looking for a hippie, sandal wearing ascetic as their icon to emulate. Let the Obamas get paid like more recent past presidents in capitalist USA and then use their earnings for some good.
I don't recall any editorials complaining about Bill Clinton's money-earning speeches.  Please give Mr. Obama a break.  He didn't come into office wealthy, and didn't leave it wealthy.  Now he must continue to earn his keep, and I wish him every success. 
Where is the outrage at the firm PAYING this much money to hear him speak?  If he didn't charge that much, they'd be able to make a profit off of him.<br/><br/>Honestly, I am only disheartened because this is only an issue if he seeks power again, and I had hoped to see him on the Supreme Court one day.
Just disappointing, perhaps the money is slated for charity.
When it comes to post-office profit and a lack of grace, no one can touch the Clinton's, nor, relative to what they went in with is anyone ever likely to do so,
And what "influence" does a former president, who will not be running for office again, and who cannot any longer shape US policy or law, have to sell? The Times doesn't miss the point often, but it has, and in a big way, in this instance. And do you really imagine that an hour or so in the company of 1%-ers will diminish President Obama's commitment to aiding young Black men, or to any of the causes to which he has committed himself? You disappoint me. 
I stopped when I ran into this glaring flaw in the article at the start, "....a president keenly attuned to the worries and resentments of the 99 percent...."   Fact is, he was NOT keenly attuned to anything other than the sound of his own voice.    Please, this guy could not care less about the 99 percent.   He chums around with no one who isn't in the 1%, and that's been true since the start of his presidency.   Puh-lease, a little journalistic honesty in describing him would be nice.
It is quite telling that people are excusing Obama for taking such an exorbitant amount of money for one speech and yet are so critical of the Trumps for making money.  The Obamas are given a pass and yet the Trumps are crucified on a daily basis.  The Obamas can do no wrong and yet the Trumps can do no right.  Remember Donald Trump was elected president and Hillary Clinton lost.  Some of the blame can lay at the feet of Obama.  If he had been successful as our president, Mrs. Clinton might be in the White House now.  Blame Obama.
I've been saying this for days.  Bravo.
I'm glad the Times came down on the correct side of this debate. What distresses me, however, is how so-called progressives jump all over themselves in these comments to defend this tone-deaf and, frankly, baldly greedy move by our former President. This country is turning into an unrecognizable parody of itself. No wonder we have come to elect a minor celebrity who, up to a few years ago, was only know for his greed, gold-plated apartment buildings, and firing people on television. I am sure that 50 years ago hardly anyone (except perhaps staunch corporatist types) would have defended this decision to cash in on easy Wall St money. Now everything has changed. We've already seen it with Blair, the Clintons, the Bushes, etc., and thousands of other less famous pols. It's now expected that public servants make up for lost time in the private sector by exploiting their access and celebrity for cushy jobs and speaking gigs. This is a symptom of a corrupt and unequal society. This is part of the reason for all this unrest and so-called "populism." If the Democrats reclaimed a pro-labor, non-elitist, non-corporatist platform, they could win it all and change this country for the better.  
Obama was our first African American president. Why shouldn't he reap the rewards of his intelligence and experience? I certainly hope he would accept what white america offers him. I thought we were created equal!
Deciding between immediate rewards, which are smaller in size, and rewards, which are delayed in time is real and  has been much studied in psychology.<br/><br/>In the case of US Presidents collecting huge sums when out of office,  it  raises the disturbing question if when in power, they might,  subconsciously , avoid biting the hand that lavishly feeds them later.<br/><br/>It would be only human, but this does not make it acceptable.<br/><br/>In President Obama's case, many Democrats, myself included, never understood his omission to order the DOJ to prosecute those responsible for financial breakdown in 2008.
Who cares, in the scheme of our nation's, and the world's problems, what former President Obama is charging fro speaking engagements? He will not be running for President again. He already has disclosed his taxes when he was President. He is an open book to the American people Considering the lack of oratory skills for our current President, President Obama will at least give speeches which sound presidential both in delivery and scope.  Also, he has to be on top of his speaking game fro 2018 and 2020. 
President Obama has already set the standard for the Most Intelligent and Humble President WE WILL EVER SEE AGAIN in our lifetime.. Take that Money OBAMA..with Poise 
Enough with the charges of double-standards and misplaced priorities, NYT readers. To say that the Times is being hypocritical in holding Obama to a higher standard than Hillary Clinton, or that taking $400k for Wall Street speeches is nothing compared to the ethical outrages Trump is committing, does nothing whatsoever to invalidate the claim that the "Democratic Party badly needs" the sort of example Obama has in the past aspired to be, an example that defies the perception of "Democratic leaders' unseemly attachment to the party's wealthiest donors." <br/><br/>Yes, Obama conducted himself with great integrity and composure as president. Yes, he's a paragon of virtue compared to Trump. But the NYT has a point that in observing that his paid Wall Street speaking engagements fall short of the standards he has set for himself in the past.
I don't understand the issue here. He's not running for office, and he's not being bought by anyone for future favors. Republicans are always in favor of "let the market rule" until it favors a Democrat.
If Barack Obama was running for office, these speeches might pose a problem for him. Since he's not—and I'm guessing he has no plans to do so in the future—why wouldn't he generate some revenue for himself and his family? I don't believe Obama is trying to position himself as the Most Liberal Person in America, and I've got to believe that the New York Times editorial board has better things to do than pass judgment on a former president who is no longer in the political arena. 
Despite republican's decade long effort to brand Obama a socialist, Obama is in fact a Capitalist. He's a true American like the rest of us and y'all have to deal with it. I love this.
It is a fallacy to believe that people who do good deeds should not get paid.  Why should Obama be held to a higher 'altruistic' standard?  <br/><br/>This is why the nonprofit sector struggles:  we insist on paying nonprofit leaders a mere fraction what corporate CEOs make.  The result is that the excellent leaders become corporate CEOs (and provide questionable value to society), while the merely altruistic leaders go to nonprofits.  Why do we impose this double standard?  If a nonprofit leader can earn 100x the revenue by being paid 10x their current salary, who in their right mind wouldn't support this strategy?  And yet, this is what we do.  (Incidentally, this mindset is also why women still don't get paid equally - we expect women to behave a little bit more altruistically than men).  <br/><br/>The Obamas will do great things for many people.  Why shouldn't they be paid handsomely for it?  
Isn't this called free market capitalism?<br/>Shouldn't this be called "smart" by the likes of Trump and his supporters, along the lines of our current president being "smart" for not paying taxes?
Well done to the Editorial Board for highlighting this issue. As an Obama fan, I initially approached this "odd" occurrence probably with the same scepticism of a Trump fan reading the NYT. I can now better understand the reasons why the Trump voter is not feeling the buyers remorse.<br/>I have not seen other columnists get stuck into the Obama pay-for-speech , although there was a nice analogy of the stopped clock showing the right time twice a day to encourage readers to look at some of th positives of th Trump administration.<br/>Finally , I am not in the least trying to show false equivalence here ; it's most likely that at least 10% of the audience are likely be positively affected post the the speech and the more Obama speaks to te predominantly Republican base, the better !!
What's all the furor about?  Obama took to the speech circuit, just like every other ex president.  He was paid about as much as Bill Clinton was paid, and about twice the fee that G. W. Bush commanded.  Nobody has approached Ronald Reagan's two million for a speech in Japan.<br/><br/>Obama was providing a service for a fee, just like a doctor or plumber.  It's called the free market.  There's nothing morally wrong with it.  The opposite may be true.  He might have brought some humanitarian enlightenment to a group that has always measured success by the number on the bottom line.<br/><br/>Neither Warren nor Sanders should find anything "troubling" about this unless they're determined to play the "holier than thou" game.  We expect this from he deranged on the right, but not from our allies or from responsible journalists.
I think the issue that mainstream america has with the democrats is not that Pres. Obama hobnobs with the wealthy. It is that the democratic party transformed it self into the do good party for immigrants, aliens, LGBT, refugees, the poor in other countries - all good causes and concerns, but the problem is that the democratic party still does not seem to be really concerned with the average person who is struggling to make ends meet, that lost their jobs, their homes, etc. So the forgotten decided to rise up. I suspect that democrats do care about these people, but their visible interest year after year was not on the middle class who were hurting. I think that's what the vote said. He and Michelle deserve any amount they can legally get.
What the media and the is editorial fails to consider is they have condemned Obama without asking him what he plans to do with the money. <br/><br/>Obama is not independently wealthy like Carter, Reagan, Ford, Bush 1 and 2, Trump. He still has to make a living. Would it be better if he sold his influence at a big law firm like so many ex-politicians do. <br/><br/>Obama has a  lot of work to do helping the Democrats rebuild the local party. He also has a library to build and continuing his work helping young black male initiative. <br/><br/>He is no longer running for office, so let him enjoy some perks of being a post president and go listen to his speech, it might inspire you, editorial board.
How will this play with the Democrats' base?<br/>Who cares?<br/>Former presidents have extremely limited influence in politics. Speeches by sitting presidents have even less, as Obama demonstrated abundantly during this past election.<br/>Furthermore, politics is an extremely dirty business and, if you don't have the money, you don't get to play.<br/>We need all democrats, former presidents and otherwise, to make as much money as they can so as to be able to help worthwhile election campaigns and charitable causes.<br/>The idea that Obama has to live up to some illusory liberal standard is laughable, although this specific standard seems to be something that would benefit the Republican party. 
Republicans get pilloried on these pages for seeking money. Obama does it, and it is defended in the comment section by the typical characters.
I'm pretty confident that the government will get its appropriate share of this $400,00 honorarium when the Obamas file their 2017 income taxes.  More than I would be able to say for that crooked businessman currently calling himself the president.
The more I think about it, the happier I am for Mr. Obama.  After everything the Republican Congress put him through, for every white hair,  for every insult and racial slur he and his family encountered in person and in tabloids, for every disrespectful boo and snicker he ignored during congressional speeches, and most of all, for having to deal with Mitch McConnell, the man deserves every cent he can make.
Mr. Obama is a private citizen  and is free to do whatever he wants post presidency. How he earns an honest buck is of no concern to anyone. He absorbed the racial and political jabs of the office for 8 years and should certainly be worth something other than thanks. If someone wants him to do stand up in Vegas for $400k he would be a fool to turn it down: he isn't beholding to anyone but his family now. He is already the first black president but should not be the first former president to work for free.
He already admitted that he wasn't the strapping young Socialist he used to be.
The reason Barack Obama can't set a higher standard is because - down deep - he is a cheap, chiseling politician just like Hillary.  -Zin out<br/><br/>P.S. And both of them say they hate Wall Street
For Obama, $400,000 a pop when Hillary Clinton only got $200,000.  Irving Berlin had the Obama refrain right in Annie Get Your Gun: “Anything you can do I can do better.  I can do anything better than you." 
I find the double-standard here ridiculous. I wonder if the Times has inveighed against other former presidents for making a living, or a killing, this way, post-presidency. 
Let's be real. $400,000 speaking engagement fee for a top speaker like our former president for a conference is the normal going rate. It is not a stump talk with one-liners! Why would Obama charge less? Knowing him, some charities may benefit from his earnings.
I am absolutely gobsmacked.  You had no problem with any other former president being paid to speak after leaving office.  Why are you holding President Obama to a different standard?  The black guy isn't supposed to get paid?  Every other former president gets paid and Obama is supposed to volunteer his services?  Last I heard, the 13Th Amendment was alive and well and still in effect.  He performs a service, he gets paid.  Just like all his predecessors.  Every single one of you responsible for this outrageous opinion piece out to be ashamed of yourselves.  
White paternalism and faux sanctimony is deep on this one -where's the editorial on Bill Clinton...yup, right...doesn't exist...puh-lease with the fake pearl-clutching....
America is neither looking for a saint nor sinner, king nor servant.<br/>But someone that can explain to them how to grow up, maybe get married,  raise a family, grow old and die in an ever changing world of globalization, robotics and IT automation without just being a piece of machinery! 
The sheer hypocrisy.  And liberals wonder why they lost.  If it's one thing reasonable and sane people can't stand.....it's HYPOCRISY!!!<br/>But of course liberals do not want to see the plank in their own eyes, before trying to remove the plank out of someone else's eyes.<br/>Keep on this path, and you are all but guaranteeing the Republicans will win the white house in 2020.<br/><br/>Let's hope so anyway.
Your hypocrisy almost equals that of hiring a climate skeptic to cover environmental issues, but this smacks of racism, too. Trump and his cabinet steal millions daily.President Obama earns a fee for giving a speech and you want to hold him to a higher standard? Malarkey any other  name is still malarkey and your double standard is sickening.
What's the big deal? That's what people with world experience, and a higher education make these days for speaking engagements.<br/>Do you honestly think Donald Trump could command so much??<br/>No. Wait. He doesn't have to. He's made all those backroom business deals that still haven't seen the light of day --<br/>Emoluents Clause to the U.S. Constitution, anyone???
I would happily pay $200 or $300 to hear the former President speak.  It would be refreshing after the last 100 days of the Orange Windbag lying multiple times every day for free on my tv.  <br/><br/>You know who doesn't like this fee?  People who think an African American man doesn't have anything valuable and intelligent to say.  
I've heard it said that part of the reason working-class people vote for policies that benefit the rich is that they think, "I could be rich too one day." It's unlikely to happen, but kind of like the lottery: something to pin your hopes on if you're struggling to pay the rent.  I doubt any of these people would say no to a financial windfall.  Why should Obama say no? Why is he held to a different standard than other Americans, who would cash out given the opportunity? That man has worked tirelessly for 8 years for the benefit of a largely ungrateful nation. As much as people are screaming that he sold out, a whole other group of people would scream "chump!" if he said no to the money. Let's leave him alone. Whatever Obama does now, he's earned it.
As SJ Perlman said: "In the aristocracy of success there are no strangers."
In this day &amp; age, you honestly have nothing better to criticize? Moreover, you're comfortable holding Barack Obama to a higher standard than you have held any other president?  Do you not see the inherent racism in that expectation?  That to be held in high regard he must climb a pedestal of ethical purity that this newspaper defines more strictly than it ever has for any other former president?  Sorry, but these days my moral outrage is reserved for the practice of separating families by deporting the undocumented. Or failing to grasp the ethical origins of the Civil War. Or . . . forget it: there's not enough time to provide the full list of disgraceful  attacks on our nation's principles.      
President Obama  could speak to Wall Street without accepting $400,O00. If he did his message would be far more powerful. Instead, he sending, intentionally or not, the wrong message: that money preempts.  Even for a man with the best of intentions. Mr. Obama, at least promise to give the money to a worthy cause, like organizations fighting climate change.  Please don't disappoint those who have so much respect for what you stand for. 
Go pick on Dumpster and let a REAL President have some time for him to articulate and gather his thoughts. This country owes him that much for going 8 years without a nerves breakdown or a heart attack. 
Enough of the righteousness already, there is no one on the planet who would refuse $400,000 to give a speech. I thought we were done with this kind of hyper-criticism after needlessly ripping apart Hillary.  There are a lot of more important things, save your breath for 45 and his billionaire cabinet &amp; advisors.
They were on the cheap side paying him only $400,000. What does that really buy these days. No yacht for sure, just a nice speed boat. He is easily worth $1 million....no $2 million. Truly his genius words will be different to this group than what he told the sheeple for eight years. This will be a lifetime experience for everyone in attendance. And quite a rewarding experience for him too.
What makes me uneasy is the audacity of assumption that the Obamas will not use the fees they can command (and from those that can afford to pay them) to continue doing good work for those that need it. Who's to say that the honorarium he receives from Wall Street doesn't offset pro bono talks or charitable contributions? I have more faith in the Obama family -- to use their intellect, passion, compassion AND wealth to aid and improve our world -- than I do in the people writing the checks to hear them speak. 
The Democrats are out of touch?  Who else is supporting the ACA, free college tuition, increasing the minimum wage, expanding social security and Medicare, protecting the environment, regulating banking, creating jobs with infrastructure spending?  We may have to study the bias of those who are (not) listening...
Thought leaders survive in a capitalist economy by selling their writings, speeches and personal stories. At pay scales relative to their times, they always have. Sitting on boards and performing directly paid lobbying are another story. A moratorium on that activity may be reasonable, if presidential pay is increased to something more appropriate.The speech and book advance numbers only seem obscene now because most top selling authors and speakers get paid so much more today. If we lived in a socialism based economy, some board or commission may have needed to determine the worth of the President's words. Neither system is perfect, ours is infinitely preferable.
The Obamas are both conscientious, accomplished, highly-educated legal professionals who have given most of their adult lives to serving the American people.  All of this was done at great sacrifice to the incomes they could have been making in their chosen fields.  I fully expect that they will continue this mission, and I for one do not begrudge them an iota for living lives commensurate with their academic training and unique life experience.  Most of this money will be given to causes they believe in, but we need to acknowledge this is their business, and their's alone.  There are no two people in this world I trust more to do the right thing. 
That a Wall Street firm paid a popular ex-president what amounts them as a little more than "pocket change" is of little concern to me.<br/><br/>What was appalling was this statement:<br/><br/>"As the presidential election clarified so painfully, the traditional party of working people has lost touch with them. In a poll released last week, more than two-thirds of voters, including nearly half of Democrats themselves, said the Democratic Party is out of touch with the concerns of the American people."
The former president is clearly politically astute, understands optics and surely knew that large a speaking fee would generate criticism. I'd like to know what his thought process was in taking it. Of course, he has had puzzling unforced errors, like saying in a press conference he didn't have a strategy to defeat ISIS.
I look paid speeches by politicians the same way I look at payments NCAA athletes:  Their positions have become so inextricably linked with money and commerce that it is impossible separate them.  Besides, who can blame the guy?<br/><br/>That being said, optics are very important in politics and he definitely doesn't do the democrat agenda any favors with this kind of thing.
I'm a Bernie backer and I am guessing that Hillary backers won't find President Obama's chumminess with Wall Street to be at all disturbing, as I do.  Corporate Democrats like President Obama seem to see only the upsides of globalization and the drastic concentration of wealth in the hands of fewer and fewer people. Most of them, including friends of mine, happen to have benefited disproportionately from these processes. But whatever cheap consumer products these processes bring to Americans, and whatever statistical benefits they bring to people in far off lands, the "invisible hand" ideology seems to destroy the social and environmental fabric wherever it goes. This in turn sparks reasonable voters towards Brexit, Trump, substance abuse, and heaven knows what else. Instead of prosecuting the banksters for their housing crash, we continue to reward duplicity in service of profit as some sort of higher good. Let's hope that someone more illuminated can return Americans to values more meaningful than mere economic efficiency. 
The Obamas should be free to make what they can make.<br/>Wall Street types are making a lot more than he is, so why shouldn't President Obama demand a lot when speaking to them?   It may give him the freedom to speak to non-profits, educational institutions or do other work without being compensated as much.   It's just another way to spread the wealth around.   And why shouldn't the Obamas make money for who they are and what they've accomplished?  It's really how they use it or what they do with it that matters.   If they start buying gold plated towers or ritzy golf courses and putting their name on it,  I'll change my opinion.
I hope that instead of pocketing the paid speech money he instead donates it. That will quiet the critics and if he has a book deal worth tens of millions, he certainly doesn't need $400K. 
If Hillary Clinton had used those lucrative speaking engagements as occasions to upbraid corporate interests for their selfish abandonment of social awareness and responsibility and their actions plainly contrary to the commonweal, and then published those speeches that showed her speaking truth to power against her financial self-interest, she might well have won.
As Washington Post columnist Ruth Marcus said on morning joe today and in a column yesterday, the Obamas can live very well on their $65 million dollar book deal and as such should not follow the path of previous presidents like Bill Clinton and just cash in.  It would not be so agregous if then President Obama had actually prosecuted any of the Wall Street titans who wrecked our economy and got away unscathed.  Instead, he and his then Attorney General Holder, protected those same executives who then returned the favor with massive contributions to his presidential campaigns.<br/><br/>The former President should follow the post presidency example of Jimmy Carter rather than his other predecessors.
The highest paid football players bring $1 million plus per game, so it doesn't seem unreasonable that Obama makes $400K for a speech.  
I'm an ardent Obama man. I believe him to be the best we've seen and will see for quite some time. So that said, I was deeply disappointed by his decision to collect on the presidency in such a manor. I don't begrudge the man a dollar or a long vacation, but the way he's cashed in since his presidency ended has been startling.
As always, the abiding characteristic of the US political system isn't how much corruption there is, but how much of it is legal. <br/><br/>What's shocking in this comments section is how few NYT readers appear to recognize corruption, or of those that so, how little they care about it when it's their person doing it. 
While I can appreciate the sentiment of staying true to values, why do we hold the Obamas to such an impeccable standard?  They served for eight years with elegance and grace;no hint of scandal, exhibiting a level of self control that is near saintly given the mud and muck that was thrown at them. This is their opportunity to reap rewards AND continue to move their compassionate and genuine agenda forward.  There  is nothing unethical, illegal, immoral or dangerous to the public by them enriching themselves. This cannot be said of the current White House occupants for whom the bar seemingly no longer exists.
I am much happier having the Obamas decide how to spend this money than the investment house paying it. Much happier.
For those of you who are critiquing us for critiquing Obama, here is why it matters. Let me try to address the common comments:<br/><br/>Why critique only Obama about paid speeches?<br/>Nice strawman, the answer is: we shouldn't; we should not have allowed this practice probably ever. It just so happens that now is a critical point in American history, and the role of special interests in politics is increasingly under fire. For Obama to do this is to give credibility to those who would call him and/or the system corrupt - so really, this is a rhetorical issue. This system is corrupt - he might not be - but he isn't helping his case. And please, don't claim that its because he's black that we are asking he not do this speak, that only weakens your point and clearly you haven't learned from the election if your saying that.<br/><br/>Who is this speech hurting?<br/>Everyone. Imagine if someone told you if you do them a favor now, you can make a lot of money, easily, later. Revolving door jobs, speeches, etc. This speech, just like the Clinton's and other previous president's speeches, is harmful because it allows for a casual quid pro quo system to take root - that hurt's everyone except the special interests in question. Trump will get these offers, especially if he helps some friends out...My point is, the words don't really matter - its the (reality of perception of a) transaction (particularly regarding private speeches).<br/><br/>Plus, presidents get great book deals - do they need these speeches? No.
It depends on what he does with the money...
NYT, this article is analogous to the “white gaze” Blacks received during the Jim Crow south when they managed to receive any material gain, no matter how meager, that the good white folks did not approve of.  In other words, the Blacks were acting “uppity.”<br/><br/>A bonified bandit is currently occupying the premier public housing complex, putting forth policies that enrich himself, his family, his posse, and robbing the public coffers blind.  <br/><br/>Put your focus there instead of on a private citizen that lived in the same public housing complex for 8 years and left without one ethics violation.  
Given the 1% made out like bandits the past 8 years while the poor (and black) suffered greatly, I think 400k per speech is the least that Wall St could offer. 
It’s ridiculous to say that Mr. Obama who is an ex-President and private citizen is setting a bad example by taking speaking fees when the current President and his whole family are using the Presidency to expand their personal wealth while using the trappings of government as part of a media campaign to raise the profile of their private businesses.  This double standard is beyond belief!!
How how do we know President Obama is not donating the money to a charity of Foundation?
One might have hoped that Trevor Noah's succinct and funny dismantling of this absurd argument would have put an end to it.  But just as we're told that black voters are to blame for Donald Trump because they didn't turn out in sufficient numbers to overcome the white people who nominated and supported him, so it is that the black ex-President is to be condemned for making money in his new life.  It seems that no matter what white Americans do, it's black Americans who are expected to fix it and who will be blamed if they don't. 
The man has two college-age kids.  He needs to make some money!  I don't begrudge him a penny of it.  It's legal, and he's worth it.  
Oh please. Show me some outrage about the current President's milking of our treasury for all it is worth. Last time I checked we were spending $3 million a weekend and advertising his club via the State Department website. IN the meantime, our last President's got two college educations to pay for. I hope he makes a boatload of money and I don't care how he spends it. He's earned it.
Remember the outrage when Romney got paid 200k a speech, Hypocrisy just doesn't apply to Democrats. They constantly rail against 'the rich, the top 1%' and then get paid millions for being nice to the banks when they were in office. Now the NYTs are saying '65million for a book deal...why not?' 800k for two speeches, its a free market! Wow, now Dems believe in capitalism and the free market! Hypocrisy has NO definition in the Liberal dictionary!!
Do Obama's detractors think he should have negotiated the fees down? Would Trump do that? Pul-eeze! The Obamas have every right to make money from Wall St and other big money organizations willing to pay them. I would,however, be very disappointed if they charged the ACLU, Planned Parenthood and other non-profits the same. That would be a character buster for sure.
Pay for play has become as American as apple pie. So sorry  Obama couldn't set a new standard.
As in all things political, it isn't about the money at all.  It is all about the optics.<br/><br/>Now ever opposition talking head will say "See, your idol, President Obama, also has feet of clay....."
Ours is a Republic. And a Republic - as John Adams  observed - is undergirded &amp; protected by public virtue ..  The simplest &amp; most fundamental public virtue is one where officials never use public office for private gain<br/><br/>This norm  (as well as dozens of others) are under stress the current Vulgarian-in-Chief enriches himself &amp;  his clan..  But Trump  is not the only one.  Obama - it breaks my heart to say - is guilty as well. Perhaps not in to the same degree – but he is guilty. And he should be ashamed.<br/><br/>After the Construction was written in Philadelphia over 200 years ago Mrs. Powel of Philadelphia asked Benjamin Franklin, “Well, Doctor, what have we got, a republic or a monarchy?” With no hesitation whatsoever, Franklin responded, “A republic, if you can keep it.” <br/><br/>Right now, we are losing it. The lights are starting to dim
Concern trolling editorials by a paper that has clearly lost its way are the problem here. Not what Obama does to earn money. Focus on the criminal activity in and around the current occupant of the White House, not the accepted and normal conduct of the last guy. 
What business is it of yours how the President supports himself, his family and his causes now that he is no longer president. Get over it. There is nothing wrong or dishonest about what he is doing. Leave the man alone!
Considering how much Mr Obama knocked himself out in service for our country for the previous 8 years--truly an aging ordeal, when a President truly applies himself hard--I do not feel one should begrudge Mr Obama's pursuit of well-compensated presentations now that he is out of the office.  Consider how much personal time  and quality sleep time he must have given up for the past 8 years. 
Please, NY Times, do your homework! Maybe report on the public speaking industry. Agents work on a percentage basis.  They won't even take you on if you charge less than $10,000 per speech. Every qualified agent would book Obama for the most they thought he -- i.e., they -- could get.
Times, run by a very wealthy family, whined about the Clintons vacations plans.  Complaining about the abiity of President Obama to command speaking fees embarrasses the Times.
I wonder if the writer has read the New York Times lately to see what is going on with the current administration, and still feels that this was the best use of their moral questioning?
Even when out of office, the Left continues their unquestioned support of Saint Barry.  When this editorial rightfully chides Obama for feasting at the 1% trough, the Left reflectively turns the topic to Trump.
Obama some months ago said he wanted to work for a Wall St investment firm, so this speech fee is no surprise.  We always covered for Wall St,  one of his biggest blunders ever,  not one bigshot Wall St banker was ever prosecuted for the 2008 crash.  He was in bed with them, now he's getting paid for remaining in bed with them.
I truly believe that Mr. Obama's is a voice that still needs to be heard.  Whether he is paid for a speech that is part of the norm in this country for ex-presidents and other ex- politicians makes no difference.<br/>If he's interviewed by the NYT or other news outlets his is a welcome voice.<br/>If he happens to speak extemporaneously in an unplanned setting that is welcome too.<br/>He doesn't have to set any example or seek higher ground to prove his worth.<br/>He is free now to conduct himself how and where he chooses.<br/>His integrity is not in question.<br/>Let it go.
It is obvious, that as an extraordinarily person he deserved this $400K.<br/>It is also obvious, that with $65M for books and $400K speeches he is loosing legitimacy and touch with poor... This is his choose.
I don't think the president or his wife owes it to Americans to wear sack cloth and ashes to prove their bona fides. They have. If anything, these are the people I'd want to be millionaires. Given what he just went through, he's earned a little of this!<br/><br/>I think they'll go the large (wheezing) corporate charity foundation route. Yes there is money to be had personally, and questionable accounting defined as doing good, but it will also control vast sums for good projects he will do.<br/><br/>Watch what he does with the money before you condemn him this hard.<br/><br/>What you wrote is is so good and true -- "It’s not beyond imagining that Mr. Obama could break with a practice whose ills he observed so astutely, and which contributed to the downfall of the Democrat he hoped would cement his legacy."
I applaud the effort, but please....does the editorial board see the rest of the content in this newspaper? Coverage of MET galas and multi-million-dollar brownstones for sale, not to mention the advertisements - It's clear that this is a newspaper for the privileged (myself included) by the privileged. Talk about surprising tone-deafness - this editorial is just as awkward and off-the-mark as that Kendall Jenner Pepsi commerical. Maybe just a small acknowledgment of the NYT's reputation as an elitist media outlet and/or how the board mistakenly supported Clinton over the perfect ideal Democratic leader that they describe here, would have made this less awkward.
Incidentally - I've seen ads from Chase, CitiBank, Manhattan Mortgage, E-Trade, Scottrade, Fidelity, etc., on your paper.<br/><br/>Is this not an equally "bad optics" from an ostensible independent source of news?  Is NYT able to stay objective when reporting on the Wall Street, if it takes $$$ from it?
Every President does this.<br/>       We wish our once-high and mighty didn't have to so baldly sell their time and access but the downgrade in lifestyle from the White House to anything else has to leave holes that can only be filled with the security that cash provides.<br/>      I don't like this either, so I don't buy former Presidents' books. 
Most of the comments in response to this article  are not only hypocritical, but hilarious!    Be honest folks.   He is  just another swamp creature like all the rest of them!
No real news today ... really? REALLY!?<br/>Get. A. Grip.
Would that it were $400 million.   Maybe this is the only way we will ever be able to circulate the money resting luxuriously in the top one percent.
The question is:  how much money does one need?<br/><br/>If Barack and Michelle Obama stand to receive $65 million for two books, each writing one book, then they really don't need to harm their image with pricey speaking fees.<br/><br/>Barack: turn down the speech, or accept a modest fee.  There's no other smart choice.
He deserves to be paid for his speeches.  Mr. Obama is at least worthy of the payment some of the past presidents are not.  And $400,000.00 from Wall Street is not even a drop in the bucket of their ill gotten gains.  Why should he be worth less than past presidents when he has more value than any of them.  They should have paid him $500,000.00.
Hillary Clinton was paid $250K for a speech from the non-profit UConn Foundation in 2013 while this public university raised tuition by 6-8% yearly ever since.<br/>Receiving $400K from a Wall Street firm fits this pattern of some of the leading Democratic politicians, even if it is from a for-profit entity. Ex-Presidents' pensions, health care, office support, transportation etc. are outstanding. It should be an ideal basis to campaign for politics without restrictions of the official job.<br/>It's important to understand how this is a reason some people love Trump. Sanders and Carter have a much different morale, work with a different perspective. It makes them trustworthy. Perhaps one of the conditions for a convincing Democratic path to advance social politics.
Former President Barack Obama paid his dues in full for eight years.  Why should he not earn big checks for his time and brilliant mind? Especially when the bulk of his earnings are going to charity -- such as his effort to change redistricting laws which gave away the USA to the GOP.
President Obama is a private citizen.  Within legal boundaries he is entitled like any other American to make a buck or a billion as he is able.  Can't we wait a few years to see how he lives, what values he exhibits, and what he does with his money before questioning his integrity in making it?
I often find myself comparing  two of world's largest democracy India and US.Since I was born in India and US is my adopted country.  And I often feel that Gandhi set an impossible standard for Indian politicians by denouncing wealth which in turn had politicians look for means of getting wealthy under the radar. this tendency gave rise to corruption. In  Pursuit of wealth is normal, lets not start demonizing it, unless that payout results in harm to the nation. If not politicians have right to earn money legally without inviting criticism. The moment we start criticizing them for earning money legally, very soon they will do so illegally. 
And if he had accepted a fee of say, $50,000, you would have complained that he cheapened the office of president.  <br/><br/>That sentiment that sounds almost quaint as I think about it now...
In my entire working life of over 30  years  I have managed to save about $250K towards retirement and I believe that statistically I'm one of the thrifty ones. Of course I have had to buy Long Term Life Insurance so that the money doesn't go up in smoke in case I land in a facility. The idea that anyone - even a former President - could make almost double my entire life's savings with one speech...is sobering indeed. 
How many on the countless people on the speaking circuit aren't "cashing in," perhaps even some NYT columnists? Whatever happened to the concept of free speech and free enterprise? Ooops, forgot that speaking fees become an issue when it involves a Democrat. If there is so much concern about money buying influence, why not ban corporate campaign contributions? 
I agree. I was very disappointed that Obama's first foray back into public life was a high $$$ speech to wealthy Wall Streeters. Not that I begrudge him the income, but I - and we - need him to be his best self up there in the limelight, someone to look to for leadership and guidance instead of just another player in the top dollar game. :-(  
I have no issue with highly successfully or skilled people being well paid.  Is the implication this is some sort of payback or bribe?  Evidence?  Or more empty "he's a muslim / Death panels " etc etc etc. <br/><br/>Quit looking for saints.  Any of you complaining would find a way to accept the money.
Please try to get your facts straight. Carter took millions from Arab sources before writing his book which denigrated Israel and advocated a return to indefensible borders.<br/>It was Professor Alan Dershowitz who detailed, in a series of articles, the millions of dollars of funding that Carter has personally and institutionally taken from leading Arab sources—including former Saudi King Fahd, the now-defunct BCCI bank that was controlled indirectly by the Saudi royal family, and Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahayan, and Agha Hasan Abedi, among others.
"Now, as he commits to building future American leaders, we have the audacity to hope he’ll set a higher standard for past presidents." In this day and time, THIS is what you choose to focus an editorial on? Such hypocrisy! I think he's set a high enough standard already, given what he and his family were put through for eight years. Focus the light where it really needs to shine and that would be on the current occupants of the WH. How incredibly short-sighted and deeply disappointing of the NYT Editorial Board. 
Obama has been laughing at his critics, especially those closest to him, since he's been in politics.  He had them all convinced he had higher motives; all he wanted was the money, just like every other career politician.  Money and power; those are all that matter to them.  Obama i s laughing all the way to the bank.
Astonishing that the New York Times seems be disappointed that Obama is not demonstrating traditional Democratic values. Obama and the Clintons represent traditional Republican values though, something contemporary Republicans have abandoned. The NYT vigorously, with more bias than I can ever recall, led the coronation of the Celebrity-Aristocracy-Royal Wannabe Clintons. For the very active drum majors for the Clinton Cult now to criticize Obama for his $400,000 speech is mind-boggling. You all but denied the very existence of Bernie Sanders for a very long campaign time, then after finally acknowledging a non-Clinton candidate in the Democratic campaign, spent a long time ignoring, disparaging, mocking and undercutting him. Sanders was and is the only "Democrat" with integrity who is still an active presence for the Democratic Party (before it became the Clinton/DNC Cult Party). It was also astonishing that the NYT made an almost positive mention of Jimmy Carter who is the only true, unfailing, honest and decent Democrat around and he was treated badly by the Clintons, the Obamas, the Bushes and the media. Coronation of the Corrupt and Vilification of the Good and Genuine. Still searching for your moral compass, are you? So is the Democratic Party! Bill Clinton gave us the Bush-Cheney regime. Hillary Clinton gave us Trump. Obama embraced Clinton. Warren embraced Clinton. Where ARE the REAL Democrats? Leave the Clintons and Obamas to Wall Street and let's move on from them! 
I don't disagree with your point.  But I can't help but notice nobody seemed to be too tremendously bothered by this trend until first a prominent woman took advantage of it, and now a black man. Suddenly this moment, the need to be pure.
This opinion also plays into the self-hating 'limousine liberal' mentality. Sure, when a Democrat shows up in a limo, they are derided for it. Republicans? They're expected to show up in a limo, so no big deal. I think this man earned every right to sell his intellectual assets to anyone who will pay.
Let's make other former President's go first. 
The best parents lead by example.  Obama has set a terrible example for  the American people.  Say one thing and do another. We are not a democracy, we are an oligarchy.
Wait a minute. DJT is promoting M-a-L on the State Dept. website, Ivanka and Jared do deals in China, and DJT gets legal copyrights, so no charges of currency manipulation are leveled on that country, Jared almost got financially bailed out, by a Chinese insurance company, of absurdly overpaying for 666 5th, Flyynn is taking money from Russia and Turkey as a NSA executive, Exxon is ready to re-open their $500B pipeline deal with Russia, the Keystone pipeline will now run through sacred tribal lands, and DJT's weekly golf forays have already cost the US $12M, but we are worried about Barack's taking $400K for a speech to a very wealthy audience?  This kind of blind-eye higher moral double standard is why Dems continue to lose.  Backroom bribes matter.  We are verging on an oligarchy.  Please repeatedly pound the table on where our corruption really lies, not whether or not any Democrat is morally 'pure.'  Scale matters, and when compared to the Repubs, the Dems are amateurs.
Seriously? This seems to be racism cloaked in white privileged cloaked in editorial naivete.  Regardless of his moral stand is not the man entitled to make a honest buck?  This man was the standard of ethics while in office. He was handed a country endanger of collapse and worked hard to save it.  Yes the Wall Street firms seem to have a great deal of money to spend but is that not his right as a citizen?  And do you know how he is going to spend it?  You're reaching here and it shows. 
Why should we be surprised that Obama is making $400,000 for a speech to Cantor Fitzgerald?  He has also signed a $65 million book deal with Michelle Obama.  He is just your typical politician.  A socialist president turns into a capitalist once he leaves office.  He had his supporters fooled but he is now laughing all the way to the bank.  Welcome to the millionaire's club the Obamas.  It certainly did not take you long.
Dear "THE EDITORIAL BOARD",<br/><br/>President Obama received, far as I or you know, any compensation for such activities. Possibly the most decorum focused president since George Washington bore the burden of setting the standard in the first place. Obama similarly bore the burden of setting the standard of behavior for a non-white male president and he did it unblemished for a decade.  As Barrack Obama is a citizen working now in the private sector. he is entitled to any financial compensation provided under legal context. Although his ideas have appeared to drift well further into the realm of moderation, he is not nor ever was a Marxist. What he is is again a working man who has done more to prop up the ideals of decency within public service than any living American. This content should not fit the Times and that it was written or stamped as written by your entire editorial staff concerns me more than anything I've read so far on this website in 2017. I will ask for another article signed by all of you apologizing for this one, but I know that is less than realistic. In preemptive response to your failure to address your own shortcomings as an emotional fluke which stands now as a cruel blemish on the idea of Truth that you have claimed arbitration over, I say good day.   
Capitalism!
I'd love to see everyone, everywhere, being less greedy. Why does anyone need millions or billions of dollars? But I also don't expect the first black president to be the first to turn down huge speaking fees. I say go for it, Mr. Obama. 
"[I]t is disheartening that a man whose historic candidacy was premised on a moral examination of politics now joins almost every modern president in cashing in. And it shows surprising tone deafness..."<br/><br/>It's not disheartening.  For eight years, the Obamas were put through the wringer, subjected to every conceivable humiliation. I'm glad that Barack Obama is able to earn huge amounts of money from people who are filthy rich that will make he and his family secure. I don't think the money will compromise his morals. He'll be able to help people even more if so inclined because he can afford to.<br/><br/>And how is he tone deaf? Is he, like Yellow Fluff Head, acting as if everyone else can jet down to Palm Beach on a whim?  Did he and his family try to monetize the Presidency in the most base way while in office? Did he commit treason by conspiring with a foreign government?<br/><br/>And to almost any black person, it's gratifying for once to see a black person enjoying these outsized rewards, even if none of us directly benefit. 
This is deeply upsetting to me. Barack Obama served our country honorably - he and his family had to sacrifice much for us. He does not come from a rich family, and neither does his wife. He needs to provide for his family. Why is he held to a different standard than all presidents before him? And quite possibly, the Obamas' will continue to donate a significant part of their income, unlike the current occupant of the WH. Leave them alone already. Focus on the conflicts of interest in the Trump WH.
As the kosher hot dog company used to say (maybe still does, I've not lived in the United States for a dozen years), "We answer to a higher authority." Barack Obama will do just fine from being a responsible board member, book deals and such. He needn't pull the rug out of his name's integrity any more to augment his income. He's hurt himself enough by essentially having chosen the Clinton Global Initiative over Senator Bernie Sanders months ago. He can't afford the $400k stuff like this, if he really wants to the historical figure he'd like to be. He just can't.  Thanks for this, New York Times Editorial Board, very much!
If Obama donates some of the fee to charity, there'll be a "Robin Hood" aspect: taking from the rich to give to the poor.  Minus the threat of violence, of  course.
I do not understand why we all expect Barack Obama to reject a fee, freely offered, for a speech he certainly is capable of giving. So he also doesn't have right to earn a living??? He is an ex-president and he deserves to enjoy a post presidency. And that includes "cashing in" on the pedigree his outstanding 8 years earned him. It's baffling, hypocritical to even suggest he detracts from any categorical model by getting paid for speeches.
"The Editorial Board" is a very poor group to speak of class.
Nice way to burnish his legacy, that's for sure.  But from a racial perspective as the first black president, this just will help dispel any notions that he was any less capable or different than all those white ones who came before him.  
Shame on the New York Times for this blatantly hypocritical and biased article. President Obama has the same right to give speeches and accept the going rate as any other public figure. If you think that should be illegal than you can certainly editorialize in favor of such a law being passed.  Why don't we wait until after he gives the speech and then discuss the contents of that speech. 
Hope and Change...what a joke. Oh, Trump is no different. Right or Left, it's government vs you!
There is nothing wrong with Obama getting the usual fee for a speech! Remember the purpose of money: it is to support yourself.Those who expect others to do these things for free may have forgotten this. You can't eat air. You have to make some money, in order to be able to do any good! And, also, to eat.
My comments dont matter, in view of the thousands of others... But it will be really disappointing to millions of people if he pockets this money.  He should donate it to some charity.  He doesnt need the money.  We were kinda hoping that he would not go the money route.  
This is a non-issue and shame on anyone who makes it more than it is. President Obama is out of office and free to do whatever he wants to do! Why doesn't the NY Times focus on the liar-in-chief making money WHILE in office?  I thought we believed in free-market capitalism?
Huge double standard here. Former President Obama should be allowed to speak anywhere he pleases without criticism from the media or left-wing Democrats...
C'mon, don't be naive. Obama for the 99%... really?<br/>On the wallet side, everyone's a trump!<br/>On the postures, its another matter!
The current so-called President is turning Washington into an embarrassing spectacle and making off with the White House silver. All right, then: time to excoriate Barack Obama for taking a speaking fee.
Why is it not "moral" for him to accept money for a speech? He's not the President. Bernie Sanders is "disappointed," and Van Jones thinks Mr. Obama should do a "poor tour" first.  Ridiculous! Barack Obama served our country honorably for eight years without a single scandal. He is a private citizen; it is not his job to be the torch bearer for some individuals' ideas on morality for the rest of his life.
Obama wanted to be president strictly for the Benjamins.
Fairly well established that Bill Ayers ghost wrote Obama's first book. <a href="http://www.aim.org/aim-report/did-bill-ayers-write-obamas-book/" title="http://www.aim.org/aim-report/did-bill-ayers-write-obamas-book/" target="_blank">http://www.aim.org/aim-report/did-bill-ayers-write-obamas-book/</a><br/><br/>The style difference in second book is substantial and was supposedly written by Obama's speechwriter Favreau and others.
You don't get $400,000 for nothing. The $400,000 is like protection money. The Obama's, the Clinton's, and the Democratic leadership are corrupt. So is the Republican leadership, including Trump. The only real difference is that the Democrats are the bigger hypocrites, since they are supposed to be better. 
He is entitled to it.  He donates to charity and pays his taxes and is not advocating tax cuts for himself. Should he speak to bankers for free?  Frankly, he is a role model.  
The Clinton's severely damaged the Democratic Party with their arrogance.  Now, this from the President Obama?  He needs to rethink this and live off of his book fees.
Why shouldn't President Obama accept the money for the speech?  As long as he's not changing his opinions, what's the harm?<br/><br/>It's in contrast to the New York Times, which has sold its soul by appointing a climate change denier to its editorial page in order to increase subscriptions by the far right wing.  <br/><br/>It's hypocrisy for the NY Times to have published this editorial.
OK, all the hand wringing over this is a little hard to stomach--  I agree It is inappropriate for a sitting or future president to take fees from Wall Street or others for whom he might become influenced by or obligated to.  What is the loss of morality or inappropriateness or any other measure of a president who has all of his power and all of his decisions in the past and behind him?  What is the downside to his taking the best payment he can get?  Is this not the American way?  Obama's resume is unique and compelling--his insights uniquely valuable-- while $400K for a speech is a ton of money, supply and demand is as American as it gets-- where else can you go to get a presidents perspective like Obamas?   The editorial board needs to look in the mirror and evaluate how they got their own jobs and income-- Its really not that different-- Give me a break editorial board-- the man was the first African American president, not a modern day incarnation of Jesus!!
There is something inherently wrong when anyone can earn in  90 minutes of speaking the same amount as their ANNUAL SALARY as President of our country.<br/><br/>Just one more example of how morally bankrupt our society is.
Money is above anything else in America. "In God we trust" on the back of our dollar bills should be replaced by "In Money we trust"?. Politics in America is entrepreneurship behind mask of public servants indeed. Rich peoples' philanthropy is another gimmick behind perpetuating injustice and perpetuating inequality. Lamentable and disgusting!. As someone said "Any lofty and highfalutin rhetoric is vacuous without self--interest". 
President Obama has the opportunity to develop a different path here. I'm sure that he could still be a very rich man accepting $25K speeches or even $5K speeches of his choice. In fact, his "choice" would be the operational word. Imagine a former president giving a speech for $1000 at an organization that is worthy of his words. He can yield more power by accepting less and being far more discriminating. He, George H. W. Bush, and Jimmy Carter each have the ability to create meaningful community in a way that others cannot. Let's not sell President Obama short by finding reasons to support his acceptance of large sums of money. 
Can anyone else imagine Bernie Sanders retiring a multi-millionaire and giving $400,000 speeches to Wall Street?  No?<br/><br/>Me neither.<br/><br/>There are two Democratic parties.  One works for Wall Street, the other works for Main Street.  Choose wisely.
I think the money he is getting is more indicative of what people think of his thoughts and advice.  I don't believe George W has been making much from speaking gigs.<br/><br/>It's funny, people are also willing to pay Hillary to hear her thoughts, but I haven't heard people begging to pay Trump for speaking before he was president.
I am perfectly OK with post presidential speaking fees with the proviso that a verbatim transcript must be available to the general public within 30 days of the speech.  If the firms paying for these speeches are not OK with this then no speech.  The problem with Hillary's speeches was not that she made them.  It was that she would not tell us what she said.
I didn't vote for Mr. Obama either time and I voted for Bernie Sanders in the NY primary and for Mr. Trump in the final in 2016 - living in New York, where the outcome was a foregone conclusion so I didn't have to feel my vote had consequences other than protest - though having said that, I'd vote for Trump again.<br/><br/>$400k for a speech?  I don't understand, but I'm not going to begrudge him the money if someone will pay it.  Like Mr. Trump, Mr. Obama is part of show business, especially post-term, which is why he already got a gigantic book deal bonus.  The US, through its media and those who consume it, have made celebritization extremely lucrative, and this is no different - and at least in this case there isn't the appearance (and more likely the reality) of buying influence by donating to a presidential CANDIDATE.
I agree with this editorial.  The Democrats lost the presidential election in November.  Part of that was due to many people being left out of the the job market, or being underpaid.  Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump harnessed the populist movement.  I understand Obama is a private citizen now, but the Democratic party doesn't need to have Obama cashing in with $400,000 speeches.  I hope he donates it all to charity.
Harry Truman was offered numerous jobs that would have made him rich after he left office, but he turned them down, saying:  "“I could never lend myself to any transaction, however respectable, that would commercialize on the prestige and dignity of the office of the presidency."  I think that expressed the principle of the matter for all time.  Jimmy Carter lived by the same rule. It's that previous presidents raked in millions after leaving office and received little criticism for it.  But I think that attention is going to Obama in this respect, not because he is black, but because he is largely viewed as being principled, whereas Bush and Clinton were not.  There has been a general, widespread decline of people's recognition of the necessary principles of good government, especially of the need to keep government clean of conflict of interest.  This has gone so far that now a Trump is possible — one that does the profiteering while holding office. The claim that criticism of Obama on this is racist ... well I can only say, I guess we will have to look to  white presidents of decades past to see what moral leadership would look like. Conflict of interest works in many subtle ways and our governments are now riddled with it. Perhaps one day, when people have suffered enough from the influence of big money in  politics, society will re-learn why Truman and Carter did America a great service when they chose as they did.
As long as politics in the USA are essentially conducted by money, there will be $400,000 speeches.  I do not begrudge President Obama his speaking fee.  He and his family served the country with grace and distinction.  They so greatly deserved their "holiday with billionaires" after the grueling past eight years.
If I could pick 3 people to have lunch with they would be The Dalai Lama, Pope Francis, and Mr. Obama.<br/><br/>But I must say, I wish he had directed that money toward charity.  It's just the appearance of cashing in like so many who seem to be just about the money.
I say, go for it! President Obama deserves to accept high fees for his speaking engagements. I have not problem with it. What he does with his money is also none of our business. He has earned the right to receive high fees for anything he chooses to do. This man is of the highest integrity, and deserves a chance to live his life without criticism. He cetainly had enough of it while in office.<br/><br/>And for the so-called Democrats who responded to the poll mentioned in this editorial, I cannot see how approximately 1000 individuals (rounded off) who responded to the poll, prove statistically that the Democratic party is out of touch with ordinary American's needs and wants. The sample is very small, and I believe that if a much larger sample was taken, the results would be different. And, for all the Bernie Sanders followers, take a look where our country is now!! Who would you rather have in office???
"To thine own self be true and it must follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man."<br/>Guess some values change --- perhaps in deference to others.<br/>The greater good?<br/>And then there is always the pragmatic. If someone is willing to pay and no one is hurt, why not?<br/>I guess the realm of the "impoverished" but true idealist has lost its membership.
In your own NYT Of Interest "In 1992, the C.E.O.s of Fortune 500 firms made an average of $2.7 million a year. By 2000, the average was $14 million."<br/>Relatively speaking, $400K not much.
Maybe President Obama trusts the $400K in his own hands more than in those of the Wall Street bankers who drove the financial crisis he inherited in 2008. Maybe he wants to put that money back into the South Side of Chicago, where he's right now building his Presidential library and crafting programs to lift up the local community. 
This NYT editorial might have had some credence had the editors shown the same sensitivity to Hillary Clinton's speech circuit income, from foreign corporations to Goldman Sachs, on the way to her candidacy and presidential campaign. With unwavering support for her since before 2008, you have allowed her a pass for the very same conduct, except that President Obama has ended his political career before these engagement. If you really need to establish a higher standard, hold it high for all, all the time or let private citizens be.
Let's all wait and see what he does with the money. I am betting he won't be investing in the fossil fuel industry or the military-industrial complex. He might just establish a scholarship program with the money. Or feed the hungry kids who won't be getting breakfast at their public schools anymore. He's a good man, and has all the money he'll ever need. So wait and see. And judge not, lest ye...
I'm really disappointed in this editorial.  Last time I checked, there was no law limiting the amount of money a private citizen in this country can make.  I read the NYT daily and depend upon it for its superb journalism in this era of fake news and alternative facts, but I'm baffled here.  Why pick on a man who has served his country so well?  Frankly, I would much rather read an editorial on this past weekend's Climate Marches across the nation and why climate change is important to all of us.  Mr. Obama's private earnings are no longer our business.
I couldn't agree more with this editorial.  It's not a fair world.  Yet one wants to believe that Barack Obama is, well, somehow different.  Better.  Plus if you've got enough already why not stop there?  <br/><br/>Seems as though even the holiest of us can be bought.  Very sad.
I don't know if it really matters, but it does bother me that Cantor Fitzgerald, who lost so many of their employees in the 9/11 terrorist attack, are now being viewed as evil incarnate.  They operate a legal business and are in no way directly responsible for the current obscene tax laws favoring businesses like theirs.  I am glad Cantor Fitzgerald survives.  They had every right to ask the former President to address them, and to pay what they paid<br/>Can't we just go after the law breakers--there are so many of them.
Meanwhile, Trump donated his presidential salary to the Parks Department and liberals screamed that he had promised he wouldn't even *take* a salary.<br/><br/>Democrats really do need to genuflect.  Look at this.  More importantly, look at Hillary.  Her Foundation was a cash laundering machine for money from foreign governments in exchange for favors and consideration.<br/><br/>I mean it.  Genuflect.  Honestly.  Put down your partisanship and look at your champions.
I think NYT Ed Board is off base here. I feel partially differently with the example of HRC, who cashed in before/between holding/running for office. Obama is very unlikely to seek office in the future, which eliminates any conflict of interest. We live in a capitalistic society in which things are worth exactly what someone will pay for it. If his written words are worth millions and NYT has no problem with that, why is it a problem if his spoken words are worth thousands.
Why should President Obama not accept the going rate for giving speeches at these corporations?  To soothe the uber-liberal minority of the Democratic Party and Bernie Sanders?  That's an unfair 'ask' you make of him.  We are a capitalistic society, and it's not as if they're going to donate this money to a charity or worthy cause if President Obama doesn't accept their offer to make a speech.  (BTW - Bernie himself owns three homes, so can we please stop with this fake persona of Bernie-the-Socialist?)
This is why so many of us are simply disgusted by politicians in the Democratic and Republican parties. I understand that pretty much every former President since Ford has cashed in on large speaking fees after their presidency. But that’s exactly the problem; they ALL do this. When it comes to Wall Street’s and big businesses’ influence over politics, there is functionally little difference between both parties. As someone who supported Hillary Clinton during the general election, one of the many reasons I had such difficulty convincing fellow progressives to vote for her was that they saw the Clintons as an extension of the influence peddling that has dominated our politics for decades. If the Democratic party ever wants to regain any relevance in politics is must start seizing on the progressive populist agenda that people are desperate for in this county. Having our former president going out and accepting large paydays from Wall Street firms undermines that agenda. Yes, he’s a private citizen and is entitled to do whatever he wants now, but good luck elevating the next generation of Democratic leaders when people start viewing you as just another corporate shill.
Before you judge President Obama too harshly, wait and see what he does with his life and what he does with the money he gets from speaking fees.  Money is power and can be used to any end, including good.  <br/><br/>The man basically put his personal life on hold for eight years to occupy an office which is acknowledged to be the most important and powerful in the world.  He endured unending criticism, and his hair went grey in the process.<br/>He'll likely never run for public office again, so let him earn what he can.  He has higher goals than amassing a fortune, and he'll need money to attain them.  
If his speech is not public, and only panders to Wall St or the moneyed interest like Hillary's (her speeches were never disclosed) then its fishy. It is fishy because it implies the big companies are using him as their lobby for making political inroads - unless he has revenue boosting ideas that their best CEO's lack. Well then the money is well deserved.<br/>I would like to understand why his speech is so useful to a private international company? Can't be technical advice, cannot be management advice (managing country is not the same as managing a business)...
If the NYT is the newspaper of record, it should be investigating the criminals in the WH and Congress rather than conflating a fee being paid for through free market economics with the present administration.<br/><br/>Shame on you.
I wonder how some of these comments giving President Obama a pass for accepting the $400,000.00 corporate speaking fee would sound if it had been Bush or, heaven forbid, Trump.  Money has poisoned every aspect of our political system.  The New York Times is right.  Enough!
What is going on at the Times? What an outrage, that frankly smacks of racism, to expect the Obamas to donate their speaking fees. If the Times wants to report on inappropriate accumulations of wealth, let them focus on the current administration and leave the Obamas alone.
Puh-lease. I love the NYT but this editorial is appalling. The man served his country with integrity, grace and a massive amount of hard work. He has already set the high standards you seek and the example you feel he still owes us. I am absolutely horrified that you equate high speaking fees with being out of touch. Donald Trump was not voted in by out of touch millionaires alone. He is also a favorite of the dirt poor. Think bigger, NYT. Rich people can have a conscience and a social awareness, too.  And I say this as an underpaid teacher who has never owned a home. 
Sorry, NYT. This is a non issue. Leave the Obamas alone and do some real reporting!
Don't put Obama on a pedestal because you have a dark lord in the White House. He should be held to a reasonable standard, that he somehow should balance Mr Trump's constant ethic violation by becoming some sort of saint seems to be asking to much. 
So, he's out of office, has no plan to re-enter politics and has no relatives in office. I fail to see what his fall from grace is all about.<br/><br/>What would be a skimpy enough speaking fee to not trigger some peoples' sensitivity triggers? $5? $500? $50,000? How many of these angst - driven critics would have no problem accepting speaking fees themselves (although maybe they couldn't draw that level of pay)?<br/><br/>Seems to me that if an organization is foolish enough to pay Obama hundreds of thousand of dollars for an hour's speech, he'd be foolish not to take it. He does have a right to earn a living.
Did I miss the article reporting that the NYT editorial board is refusing its salaries and the Sulzbergers are donating their dividends to charity, all to meet a "higher standard"?
Surely if you consider yourself a Christian as Obama does you should wonder how much Jesus charged for his speeches
Just another of case of you editors using any opportunity, like Marcus, to continue sniping at Obama! And the thesis is just plain ignorant! If you really expect The P to follow any of the Obamas' good examples, you need some serious help!
This paper has been shilling corporate neoliberal garbage for years but it's shocked, shocked! to learn that Obama is also not above making a fast buck.  Spare us the false outrage and report some real news for God's sake.
No surprise here!  Liberals' hypocrisy.  Why their constituents continually fall for the double standard... it's a mystery.
"you lie", Birthers, Supreme Court appointment, Kenyan communist, Ted Nugent,  -----I dont begrudge him a penny he makes after what he put up with for 8 years...
Just another of case of you editors using any opportunity, like Marcus, to continue sniping at Obama! And the thesis is just plain ignorant! If you really expect The P to follow any of the Obamas' good examples, you need some serious help! 
W.W.A.C.O.D. What would a community organizer do?
I did not vote for the man but I have no issue with his ability to fetch a princely sum for speaking engagements. Let the principle of economics apply. I wonder how many of the pedantic minds on the Editorial Board of The NY Times would decline an offer of a speaking engagement that would give them a $400 000 cheque? 
The 2017 United States Open Championship will be the 117th U.S. Open, scheduled to be played June 15–18:  Winner's share‎: ‎$2,160,000<br/><br/>Enough said.................
I had 3 reactions. First, I was not surprised. Next, I was a little disappointed because Obama seems a cut above the usual political trash. Finally, I figured why should a man and his wife who served our country well "wear a hair shirt" and deprive himself and his family when all these previous opportunists except for President Carter lined their pockets?  My guess is that President Barack Obama and his wife, Michelle, will probably do some very civic-minded things with their surplus. I suspect Obama and Carter will be the presidents whose after office contributions to our average citizens will top the list of those I admire most.       
Sorry to say I think a lot of commenters are missing the big picture here. "Obama is a private citizen so can do whatever he wants now"- ok sure. "Who is this hurting"- fair. "It's racist to hold him to a different standard than others"- maybe. Either way, if dems ever want to win elections again this kind of stunt sure won't help the situation.
Dear Holier-than-thou Editorial Board,<br/>Get over yourselves.<br/>Is this money coming out of your pocket? No.<br/>Is President Obama still earning a salary on taxpayers' dimes? No.<br/>Is President Obama one of the most impactful leaders this country has ever had, despite climbing daily uphill battles to pass legislation in the face of discrimination that most of *you* have never faced in your lives? Yes.<br/>Will the Obamas continue to pursue a legacy that will positively impact the world? Without a doubt.<br/>Does it take money to affect change? Yes - don't be naive.<br/>Were the Obamas born with silver spoons in their mouths? No. Not in the least.<br/><br/>So - please get off of your high horse.  Get back to me when you've walked a day in their shoes. The Obamas more than paid their dues, and I wholeheartedly believe that their views on what the world needs has not changed.  In fact, given that they now have the flexibility of being private citizens, they will be less muzzled and free to say some of the things that they could not in their roles as President and First Lady.  <br/><br/>I look forward to the change they will continue to pursue.<br/>You don't have to be broke to be woke.
400K for a speech does not feel right but I suppose it's a free market. At the end Obama has to balance being the beacon of hope with making ends meet.
As a couple and a family, the Obamas brought grace, empathy and high standards to their time in the White House, in stark contrast to the workaday vulgarity of its current occupants.<br/>========================================<br/>Leave it to the New York Times to characterize Melania Trump as a "workaday vulgarian." And they wonder why half the country has written off the incredibly biased--and just plain wrong--mainstream media.
Sorry, the time of Blacks working for free is over. Deal with it.
Of course he's going to give speeches to earn money.  It's what he does.  The man literally talks for a living.  That should be obvious after 8 years of listening to him.  
The Editorial Board says, "Democrats are seen as more out of touch with ordinary Americans than the party’s political opponents."<br/><br/>I think that's a stretch. I don't feel like I'm even the same species on the same planet as the crew in the White House now.<br/><br/>Concerning remuneration for speeches - nobody is willing to pay me to speak at their Kiwanas Club meeting. Why would they?<br/><br/>Here's a partial list of past speakers to the Philadelphia Speakers Series presented by Widener University, given at the Kimmel Center. Tickets range from $345 to $515 + $26 handling fee:<br/><br/>Ehud Barak, Gen. Martin Dempsey, Leon Panetta, Pres. Bill Clinton, Vicente Fox, Pervez Musharraf, Robert Reich, David Brooks, Colin Powell, Olympia Snowe, Steve Forbes, Bob Woodward, Elie Wiesel, John Major, Thomas Friedman, Ben Carson, Charles Krauthammer, F.W. de Klerk, Mark Shields, Karl Rove, Howard Dean, George Will, Madeleine K. Albright, Henry Kissinger, various explorers, scientists, artists, and the list goes on.<br/><br/>If the NYT can find evidence that Pres. Obama championed legislation that would subsequently enrich him after leaving office as a direct consequence of that legislation, then you would have a valid point. However, I am fabulously more concerned with the myriad conflicts of interest (and nepotism) and the status of the ongoing intelligence investigation of the current occupant of the White House, than the per diem employment of the distinguished gentleman who just left it.
You just knew the NYT couldn't write something critical of Obama without the obligatory shot at President Trump.
Give me a break! Better, give Pres. Obama a break.  What self-righteous claptrap. The Times editorial board can, I'm sure, find more deserving targets - the world is full of them.
This Times editorial dispensing advice on how the Democrats need to revive their party, makes it abundantly clear, if there was still any doubt in anyone's mind, that the NY Times is now simply an appendage of the Democrat Party.
If there is one man and one family who need no lessons in morality from the media or his, formerly, fellow politicians, it is Mr. Barrack Obama and his family.<br/><br/>When President Obama (oh how we miss you!!!) speaks to private corporations and organizations, with resources to spare, why should he not be paid "what the market will bear?"<br/><br/>When he speaks to NGOs and socially targeted organizations, maybe he already plans to speak for free.<br/><br/>Does he really need to be singled out?  "Oh black man, do not take the lucre.  Forget your family.  Republicans need to be impressed? For what end?"<br/><br/>Save the sanctimoniousness for those who need it (i.e., anyone named Trump and anyone part of the Republican hypocrisy, excuse me, Party).
Slow-jam this news....
The most dignified and graceful public official of our era is out of office, and you're still holding him to a higher standard.  Former Presidents have always earned great wealth after leaving office.  But Obama is supposed to "set an example" for the disheartened Democratic Party.  <br/><br/>I am sick of it.  Mr. Obama is supposed to be blacker, poorer, stronger, more reserved-- all in the name of setting an example.  Give the man and his family a break.  No one handed them anything.  They earned every cent of their net worth through hard work and good character.  <br/><br/>Save your editorializing for exposing Trump as the true illiterate crook that he is. He isn't qualified to shine Obama's shoes. 
My my, oh how patient and understanding, sympathetic to the poor Obamas who had to "sacrifice" for the good Ole USA the Liberals are today in their comments and Feelings.  No excuses.  The Obamas have always exposed themselves to be folks that are working their way to being 1%ers something liberals abhor, unless of course it a 1%er who is a Democrat.  Bottom line, Obama is the reason for Trump and Obama is simply another politician.
I have to admit that this really hurts!  His acceptance of $400,000 for a speech. As a fellow Hawai’i native, I worked for him HARD in both 2008 and 2012.<br/><br/>In 2012, I had become completely disabled and had to leave Hawai’i after the suicide of my military husband.  I landed in Georgia--just me and my service dog Sammy.  I took some of my small savings and bought a 1,000 campaign buttons.  Every day I went out to malls,Home Depots, Waffle Houses--buttons on my dog’s service vest (Many of their dog Bo) and all over my jacket.<br/><br/>12-14 hrs a day I walked, met people who wanted to meet and pet my service dog. I never liked calling and knocking on doors...but meeting people who came up to me..well up to Sammy.  I explained the ACA--yes same as Obamacare. Never argued..just listened and gave out buttons. I still gave $25 any time when I could afford it.<br/><br/>On the night before the election I sat on a bench in Walmart next to an elderly black man. I was SO tired and afraid that Obama wouldn’t make it in! I just started sobbing, my service dog licking at my tears.The gentleman said “Don’t worry. God won’t let Obama down.” I’m an atheist but boy did I need to hear those words!<br/><br/>I had taken time away from chemo and radiation for my breast cancer..but felt that “working” for Obama was more important than my health. This county in rural Georgia went blue for the first time in 50 years!<br/><br/>I loved Obama...but now?  <br/><br/>Obama? Are you even AWARE of what so many of us did for you?<br/><br/>So discouraged!
Can you please institute a thumbs up/ thumbs down rating for opinion columns, this one definitely deserves a finger.
I guess Obama is the same as all the other politicians He is already  is a multi millionaire and may get over $60 million for a new book.  GREED is the name. He  talks out of one side of his mouth and then on the other side courts those with money. Is  he any different than  Trump  with his  deals. In fact, worse, as Trump tells us who is is      Obama seems to love spending his leisure time with the rich on  yachts, fancy trips,homes etc. He sure does not set an example for those community  people to whom he lectures in Chicago<br/> Fool me once, fool me twice!!!!
Who doesn't cash out their chips when they leave the casino?  Maybe only fools.
This criticism is absurd. In the first place Barak Obama, like all American citizens, has the right under the First Amendment to speak. The fat cats have a complementary right to listen to said speech. They might hear something interesting about social justice that they don’t normally hear - and potentially act on it.  If the problem is the fee, then what fee is right? $390,000.00? $3.90? I’d like to see all these self aggrandizing sycophants turn down 400 Grand for a nights work… 
The most corrupt, not to mention incompetent, administration in American history currently occupies the White House. And you write an editorial criticizing Obama for giving a highly paid speech because he has bills to pay. What's wrong with you??? When all the things that really count for America are taken care of, then you can complain that our last president has feet of clay like all the rest of us. Until then, don't waste your editorial space on silliness; it betrays your secret biases!
Barack Obama sold out to the banks in 2009, when he bailed out Wall Street at the expense of everyone else.   I always thought that, as president, Hillary Clinton would have been another Obama (for better and for worse), and now, oddly, we see that Barack is just another Hillary.<br/>No wonder so many of those voters Obama failed to help in the Great Recession (it was the jobs, stupid!) turned to Trump, who, unlike O., lies about everything except one: his own bottomless greed.
All of you Democrats who make excuses for your politicians taking half a million dollars for an hours "work" is why I no longer vote for Democrats.<br/>Give me an actual reason not to vote for Jill Stein.
Trump will use this criticism of Obama sprung like a single sickly tulip from the collective brainpower of the NYT Editorial Board - he will misquote, pervert, and use it even in its pure unadulterated form to try and establish a moral equivalence between himself and his predecessor. So then, it's a good Monday morning for Trump who obviously needed something in the form of a bon bon from the Times (not counting what Peter Baker's already provided over the weekend) kicking off his second hundred days
"Not enough good in the best of us to have the right to criticize the rest of us."  Words on a country billboard I saw upstate earlier today.  Something we should all take to heart.
  Putting aside the issues of whether Pres. Obama deserves such fees for speaking, and the elite audience, I am just shocked that the leaders of the Democratic Party are so tone deaf. First were the pictures of Nancy Pelosi and other party officials celebrating and smiling at the defeat of the Republican attempted gutting of The Affordable Care Act. I voted for Obama and Clinton because I know there is a difference---and if anyone can't see that now, with Trump, then I don't know what to say. But the ACA does need to be revised and fixed and this just looked like gloating----it looked like they were laughing at the issue, and those voters for whom health care is the crucial issue. Then there was Ms. Clinton and her "deplorable" comment. Go ahead and insult millions of voters and we are surprised at her loss?<br/>  And now Mr. Obama is charging $400k to talk to the Wall Street crowd? First of all, they hate him, and second, they contributed millions to defeat Clinton---and we worry about what the Russians are up to? So the speech is legal and I would love to hear him up close but it just looks terrible and is another example of how tone deaf some of these seasoned politicians are. Appearances do matter and when you behave as if you are no different then don't complain when you lose.
Obama is a fraud.  He pretended that he could relate to average Americans and yet he is accepting $400,000 for a speaker's fee at Cantor Fitzgerald.  How many of his voters make that kind of money for speaking engagements?  What a hypocrite.  What do his supporters think of him now?  I never voted for this charlatan and am glad.
It's comical to see the regular NYT comment writers suddenly becoming so defensive. This paper which has lost it's way in its anti-Trump derangement syndrome, does the right thing here with this editorial. Of course, it's hypocritical, obscene the amounts of money ex-presidents feel entitled to. The only honest one was Carter-agree or disagree with him, a man of principles.<br/><br/>How much money do you need? Actually the Obama's are in good shape right now. We all forget, often blinded by Obama's historic role as the first black president, and his rhetorical skills, what a very conventional man he is.   He was in bed with the Goldman Sacks and similar financial interests from day one. Must he take his post presidential vacations frolicking in exclusive resorts with billionaires? Is he competing with the Clintons? Another foundation, for God's sake. Is his target the $200 million the Clinton's "earned". $65 million  book contracts-disgusting!<br/><br/>One good reason people voted for Trump-he already has money
A $400,000 fee paid to a former President compared to the crass, systematic and self-interested destruction of any semblance of ethical self-dealing boundaries by the current grifter family in the Executive Branch.<br/><br/>Do you publish this kind of editorial because staff are cowering in a corner worried what Fox News is going to say about the failing NYT and trying to appease the Cult?
This event, like renting the multi-million dollar house, and vacationing on the private island, simply confirms that President Obama's ear, and voice, and time, can be bought.<br/><br/>If he is not to be a monk, then be holy and cast over the chef's 86-course tasting menu tables of the stock traders when he enters their mansions.  If he plays nicely with them, and play their games, he is them.  When, out of our sight, they whisper nice things in his ear and weigh your pocket with gold, what will he (the former President of the United States) say to current office holders, journalists and others who ask his opinion when he is out of our sight with them?<br/><br/>We are living in an upside down Uber world, where the leading Democrats couldn't leave Washington fast enough to cash in, to sit on boards and take stock options.  The working class people who went from being in a wage-paying, benefit-providing job to temporarily being an independent contractor (until their client can eliminate their jobs), picked up on this, and so they voted for the gospel of prosperity from the grasping, greedy gargoyle.
What a hoot. Demanding from their socialist hero that he give all of his income away to the poor, the party and the plebes. They can't even say the words -  that their beloved socialist is now a full-fledged "One Percenter" who is loving every minute of lounging in the One Percent. The hypocrisy of the NYT and the left - and the Obamas - is just hilarious. 
Just another of case NYT editors using any opportunity, like Ruth Marcus, to continue sniping at Obama! And the thesis is just plain ignorant! If you really expect The P or another successor to follow any of the Obamas' good examples, you need some serious help!
In the words of Trevor Noah, "Obama, make that money!" Compared to the new "president" (who we allow to get away with everything short of murder because his skin is white) I'd say Obama cannot walk the moral high ground anymore than he already has. He already had to be the next best thing to Jesus because he was a black man in the WH. Enough said.
Oh please. After all the disrespect he took while in office- with stoic dignity- now he's supposed to also be a sucker? Sure. As soon as every other living ex-politician returns their speaking fees.
With nepotism, crony capitalism, and self interest running wild in the White House the Times chooses to condemn the first black ex-president for accepting a Wall Street fee? What is happening here?
What on earth is wrong with this newspaper? Get your priorities straight. Don't dedicate this space to non-issues.
The slickly wrapped grifters at the White House were still Grifters. They celebrated cop murders with Black Lives matters and rap groups. They worked in all their friends and family on so-called business or vacation tours of Europe, Africa and Hawaii. Their accomplishments were no more than making Progressives self-impressed. Now the Obama's continue what they began 9 years ago and you are all surprised?
Let the man make some money!  He's not a monk, he never took a vow of poverty.  After all of the secret Muslim, birther and racist garbage he had to endure, I hope he cashes in big.
This newspaper does not come close to getting it. Obama was not out of line with his speaking fee as it states once and for all what a Democrat has been and will continue to be. As part of the ninety nine percent we require people who are removed from all corporate money as Sanders showed us what real progressive pols do.You shoved  MRS Clinton at us and now you expect a man created in the belly of the beast to give birth to nice honest shiny politicians. The longer I read your editorials The more I think Trump is right in saying you are a failing news paper
White House vulgarity? How about President Obama saying, "We don't know all the facts yet, but it is clear the police acted stupidly." Or race relations going in the dumpster? Police becoming targets of citizens?<br/><br/>How about the known terrorist group The Muslim Brotherhood being invited to the WH? Or vulgar rap stars?<br/><br/>Yes, we have a billionaire President who unnderstands the middle class better than Obama and The Times. And taking gutter swipes at Trump shows mw why you continue to lose subscribers.
Liberals are amusing. So O is black, kinda, and so he wont take the money. Really? Cause?<br/> How many Wall Street crooks did he put in Jail? Once in a great while, wake up, please. Think.  You are amusing and also embarrassing. To yourselves. 
Set a higher standard? Would you have preferred $500,000 for the speech.<br/>Fairness alert-Republicans cannot scream about no regulation, free enterprise and complain when someone(not a Republican because they are too boring and predictable) commands a high price for a speech. Republicans are the whiniest babies and the biggest hypocrites in the world. 
Seriously NY Times Editorial board....could you be any more sanctimonious?  Why shouldn't The Obamas both make as much money as possible, just like everyone else tries to do?  You can bet that they will give plenty away through their foundation. I don't think any former WHITE president has been criticized for the amount of their speaking fees. It is absolutely absurd for you to have written this editorial. There are so many more important things to write about. How about finding out exactly how much the idiot in chief currently residing in the White House is spending every day by using our country's treasury as the personal bank account for himself and all is family?  That would be interesting indeed.
All publicly elected state, local and federal officials should be required during their terms and after to wear the purple robes and head garlands of their corrupt  Roman Senate precursor brethren. <br/><br/>This purple tunic would enable the public to instantly  recognize corruption both at the intellectual and visual level.
So the first Black President now has to be the first President to talk for free? How does that work? I think $400K for any speech is silly, but he's not the first, and probably he'll give a far better and informative speech than most. And maybe he'll work to influence the people he is talking to rather than just kiss up. If he does this 25 times a year at $400K, then maybe it's a racket, but I doubt we'll see that. Cut the guy some slack.
So the Times is surprised by this. Shows you how dumb they are, we all knew the man was a hypocrite from the very beginning.
Cut the double standard for the black guy.  <br/><br/>Come on NYT.  Are you so unable to focus on what really matters?  If Wall Street wants to pay big bucks to have a private citizen speak, let them.  After all, the Supreme Court said that is A-OK.<br/><br/>And stay focused on the malfeasance and double-dealing by the repubs and the grifter-in-chief.  THAT is where the real problems lie.
And if he takes that money and gives a large portion of it to charity, are you still upset with him, NY Times editors?
Why should he? What more do you want from him and his wife? Leave him alone and focus on the family of grifters desecrating the White House and the millions of taxpayer dollars for Melania to live in NYC and the rest of them to fly all over the place.<br/>President Obama is now a private citizen and he owes us nothing. We owe him the respect he deserves.
So, why shouldn't the guy make some money.  In this day and age of normalized lies, massive ethic breaches and crony capitalism it's perfectly ok.  Trump has made it so.  Since the American public isn't too concerned about the tangerine tyrant monetizing his presidency why even bother to comment.<br/><br/>Obviously we live in an age where the ends justify the means.  That's how far we've fallen.<br/><br/>Mar-a-Lago only needs two new members to equal one Obama speech.  How is one okay and not the other?
Really? The Black Man (or Latin, or Asian, etc.) is not allowed to make what influential White folks do for their speeches?  YOU'RE HYPOCRITES - leave him alone to get rich if he wants to ...
I suppose the market will bear Mr. Obama's hefty speaking fee, but that fee is inconsistent  with Mr. Obama's past rhetoric against wealth and the wealthy.<br/><br/>In 2015, only  0.4%, just under 800.000 wager earners, earned more than $400,000 per year.<br/><br/>Redeem yourself Mr. Obama, by  donating most of your speaking fees to charity<br/><br/><a href="https://www.ssa.gov/cgi-bin/netcomp.cgi?year=2015" title="https://www.ssa.gov/cgi-bin/netcomp.cgi?year=2015" target="_blank">https://www.ssa.gov/cgi-bin/netcomp.cgi?year=2015</a>
For many people, it they like the person, he/she can do no wrong. They just find ways to rationalize and excuse. Same principal applied to Clintons and to Trump.<br/>Trump is so awful, that for many, Obama will forever wear a halo in comparison.
Go high, Obamas, go high.
And an O true-believer that I wrote off in NYC didn't believe he was useless and a 2 faced mother just like they all are (politicians).  So what if he was the 1st black man to be POTUS?  People come in all kinds of colors. And also, just because kids were waving cellphones at him and taking pix doesn't mean he was one of them.  He was a 1%er all along.
Honest to goodness, what is the matter with you (Times Opinion editors)!  Why are you even writing about this?  Why are you holding former President Obama to a higher standard than any other former president?  How about some op-ed pieces delving into our current disaster in the White House who is the most ignorant, dangerous, demagogue alive?  Do you job!  And this piece is not it!
I see the NYT is still struggling to grasp the depth of their blind adoration of the huxster who is Mr. Obama...he didn't even pen is own autobiographies (plural).  He'll take all the money he can get - in the same manner he fundraised through his entire presidency.  You won't see insight into his presidential decision making when you see his next work of "fiction", it'll be an amalgamation of what he wants you to think about his legacy - just as was his famed college girlfriend.  Shame on you for being so naive....
The Presidency is a Gold MIne! Is there any better way to market your brand?<br/>How much will Trumpski get for a speech after he gets out?  <br/><br/>But of course Trumpski's already cashing in - he charges for his rallies.  You should be able to get a lot more for a stadium rally than a speech.  <br/><br/>He and his family of cronies are constantly finding ways to squeeze money from every decision, 'cause that's what dictators and Republicans do.  As President, laws don't apply to him.<br/><br/>Putin will not be the world's richest man for long!
Amazing to see so much common sense in a NYT editorial.  Has it finally dawned that the Democrats are no better than the Republicans when it comes to gulping from the corporate trough and accepting bribes, excuse me, donations?  Two of a kind, and it's been that way for years.  As both Ralph Nader and Ron Paul have been known to remark, what we really need is a SECOND party.
Wall Street audiences should have to pay top dollar for a speech from Obama. But he shouldn't keep the money. He should use it to advance the progressive causes he purports to support. Keeping the cash debases him.
Obama is a corporate puppet just like every other politician in Washington. His background and style were just a diversion from the reality of his policies. During his two terms the 1% got wealthier than ever, the NSA got into our phones, the TSA got into our pants, and the military began wars in Libya, Syria, Yemen, and Iraq.
I never understood how this was an issue, with Hillary or Barack. If a rich family pays Snoop Dogg $200k to show up at their kid's Bar Mitzfah, is anyone under the impression that Snoop Dogg continually owes the family favors after the event? Who cares how much money people waste to get celebrities to show up to their otherwise boring parties.
What should Obama say? "No, you keep that $400K"? How ridiculous!
39%, for now, goes back to the taxpayer in taxes.  let him get what the market demands.<br/><br/>why the navel gazing at this, while the Trump family uses the office of POTUS to line their pockets?<br/><br/>Please.............
A one-time very publicly declared payment of this size is fine, as long as you didn't base your campaign on being self funding and not taking a dime from anyone because it means you're a crook <br/><br/>On the other hand, if you went around the country and on national TV saying you bribed people and that you're NEVER going to take a cent from anyone, because you KNOW there are strings attached, that's a different story. <br/><br/>Shame on the Times and useful idiot Senators for pushing the GOP's false equivalence agenda one more time. 
Would hope that he wont just pocket the full sum, but will donate to one of the agencies that have been left high and dry by 45.
Oh, Lord. What a lot of pearl clutching! I'm sick of all the hate Obama is getting because of this impending speech. The man has every right to earn money - goodness knows he sacrificed enough during his 8 years in office.<br/>He's only been out of office a few months. Let's wait and see what he does over the coming years before bashing him for earning a living. 
Obama "wrestled with what it means to be a representative public servant in an era of purchased influence".<br/><br/>Can anyone even _imagine_ Trump having that problem? <br/><br/>Trump is already busily monetizing the presidency and raking it in, driving coach and horses through nepotism rules, emoluments clauses and ethics. He doesn't care what it means. He just cares how much he can get.
Barack Obama is on his way to becoming the richest ex-president in American History as he shamelessly cashes in on the ex- President's speaking tour.<br/><br/>Can anyone else say "Ka-ching."
It's time to stop holding President Obama to a RACIST double standard when the current occupant of the White House exudes white privilege and has told everyone else to shove it.  Enough already!  Why does the black guy have to be perfect but we're OK with an old moron shooting his mouth off daily because he's rich and white?
Your girl Hillary set the gold standard here.  Of course I am a lot more ecouraged that President Obama waited until he was out of office for his 30 pieces of silver.
Barack Obama did not seek the presidency to get rich.  He took on a high risk of assassination as the first Black President in an era when conservative media were willing to exploit racism to advance their cause. <br/><br/>He worked very hard and very long hours, ever-dedicated to serve the health and fortunes of current and future Americans of low to modest means. He tried to protect the planet and its ancient treasures.  He was put through unreasonable hell by his ever-more-extreme and partisan political opponents.<br/><br/>For all of this, he was very under-compensated and I am happy that he and his family will have some material fruits for their labors. <br/><br/>I am also partly understanding of his choice of wealthy companions for the privacy they can afford him.  But I hope his family's choice of friends will include people of modest means, too. 
Perhaps the question should be "why does the President of the United States only get some 400,000$?"<br/><br/>Looking at the responsibilities the job entails 8 days a week and 25 hours a day, the remuneration seems scant.  Compared to what many in business or entertainment get for doing far less, it is a pittance.  We are talking of someone who is seen by many as the guarantor of peace on earth, whose every word and gesture may have consequences far and wide, from scuttling the dollar to opening the gates of hell.<br/><br/>Let's not begrudge Barack Obama his humanity.<br/><br/>[Of course, all of the above applies to the common or garden variety President.  The current one is of a completely new breed, in word and gesture (and even in appearance).]
Perhaps this money is going to a foundation that President Obama and Mrs, Obama are going to set up.  Perhaps it's for education, for young people who would like to enter politics?  Perhaps it's for his Library and its work of education.<br/>Eric Schultz, a former advisor, says it is.  I can't think of a more worthy cause for President Obama to institute, if that is the case.
Obama has every right to negotiate fees for working now that he is no longer in office.  As an ex-president he has a much broader view of world situations than the average individual and his knowledge and opinions are valued. It's not like the tax payers are footing the bill or he's changing laws and regulations to personally benefit business that he or his family owns. 
I think this judgment regarding the payment is unwarranted. As a college student with membership to several orgs, I know that speakers or performers we book for any event we hold costs thousands. This man was the President, of course a sizeable speaking fee is expected. I do think the best path would be for philanthropic donations and invested, but the Obamas are definitely not obligated. It is interesting to note, however that Wall Street was willing to pay so much. I wonder what's up with that.
    Why should we insist that Democrats be self-sacrificing monks while we accept that republicans can earn bucks on reality TV?  Barack Obama was an incredibly successful president in terms of domestic policy, especially health and finance. He gets paid and he influences people who have wealth and power. I think that is good!<br/>    Further, celebrity has value and can serve as a basis of income. A celebrity Chef, Bourdain, can make in excess of $200,000 for a speech. A celebrity astronomer can make in excess of $200,000 for a speech.  A rock and roll star, Taylor Swift, averaged $600,000 a day whether she worked or not.<br/>    And while we are considering the wealth accumulated by Democratic politicians, such as Bill and Hilary Clinton, we should also consider what they do with their wealth and celebrity.  The Clinton foundation saves lives on a global scale.  The Clintons are not monks.  They are heroes.
$400K is a pretty high standard, at least for my frame of reference.  <br/><br/>I have never been paid that much for a talk, but I am open to an invitation!
I would think that being a "post President" would be the nicest status in the world.  All of the gravitas, little of the irritation of the mantle of the world's most visible -- if not most powerful -- position.<br/><br/>I do not begrudge former President Obama any accumulation of wealth that may come his way.  I hope only that he puts what he obtains to good use.   Think of all the innovations that could be supported in so many fields.  It is wonderful just to daydream about it.  <br/><br/>He has served his country well.  The time to criticize and to carp has past.
There is an unacknowledged Elephant in the room with respect to the view Democrats ignored the plight of the working and middle classes in the last election.  Yes, in some declining industries like coal that might arguably be true, and there is an undeniable tension caused by the interplay of globalization and trade agreements.  However, when one considers health care, education, income taxes, clean energy, voting rights, equal protection, international relations, and many other policy areas, the Dems clearly paid attention to the working and middle classes.   Much of this was ironically overlooked or meet with insouciance by beneficiaries in certain key areas. The big thing the Democrats ignored, the Elephant, was the blatant appeal of tribalism.  That “ism”, cloaked in xenophobia, nationalism, and populism, was underestimated.   At this point moderates still appear to lack an effective counter to them, partly due to gerrymandering and the electoral college effects.  So let’s hope that we can turn the tide with more hard work and higher voting turnout.  And please stop the whining about President Obama making money.    
Why do the "Democrats" and this editorial board and Elizabeth Warren see a higher road in willful poverty?  Obama will probably never have another "real job" - however he chooses to support his family is fine as long as it is honest.  We have no idea what the tone of speech will be - I think it will be reflective of many of the ideas he had while in office - a reiteration that Wall Street compensation should be in line with other forms of labor.  Maybe Wall Street managers will be reminded that short terms gains cannot be compensated more than day to day labor which is the imbalance we need to correct by changing the tax treatment of carried interest, and abolishing the estate tax. Having money should not be its own reward.  <br/><br/>I don't see the same folks complaining about Obama's compensation also complaining about the Trump's family "unpaid positions" that are costing more everyday....
He's obviously going to contribute his fee toward the exorbitant travel costs of our new commuter president, and our new and unquestioned norm of maintaining not one, not two, but three presidential residences. Give the guy a break.  $400,000 is a drop in the bucket on the Trump scale.  At least President Obama will use it wisely.
Big fans of President Obama and we all miss him terribly in our house. But I have to agree. It's not wrong to take this big pay-day but it's unseemly and I wish he hadn't done it.   It has the possibility of tainting the things he says. 
The ability to influence requires engagement...even if its with the 1% who control over 85%  of the world's wealth. He could stand on a soapbox  on the west side of Chicago and no one would hear him. Or he can dine at the corporate dining table and influence leaders who have a direct impact on our daily lives. And if Obama only dined with saints he would eat alone...to paraphrase a famous American Cardinal.
This editorial gets it right.  Obama diminishes himself by cashing in big time on his time in office.<br/><br/>Sure, he should speak out about the issues he really cares about, but that should be in public settings where anyone who wants to listen to him can get in, and not closed door, expensive events.<br/><br/>My only disagreement with this editorial is characterizing Obama as "a president keenly attuned to the worries and resentments of the 99 percent."  If that had been true, he would have helped the working class a lot more between 2009 and 2010, when he had big Democratic majorities in both houses of Congress.  Instead he filled his administration with Wall Streeters who made sure the 1 percenters were first in line for financial relief.  The working class realized it was being neglected and  elected Trump.
I don't think it looks that great; but why shouldn't he provide for his children's future.  Baseball players can make 25 mil a year.  Is that wrong, given today's rules?  All it would take is one hard-edged speech where Obama calls out individual Republicans by name to make this seem sooo trivial.  Still, it represents how Barack went with Hillary instead of Bernie.  He could have done from the left what Trump is doing from the right, but he was too much of a gentleman.  Democrats have to start fighting dirty like the McConnell gang.
Quid pro quo. Take care if us while you are President, and we'll take care of you later.  The message is Crystal Clear.  Obama is just proving he was one of the establishment after all.
Obama is a private citizen now with no political power to sell. So why are we so fixated on how much he is getting paid? Why are we so blase about the entanglement of Trump's Presidency with Trump's business interests? I think, unconsciously, this country is very Calvinist in its outlook. We are okay with rich people being rich, but not okay with people who did not start rich try to enrich themselves. Trump's trips to Mar-a-Lago costs taxpayers $1-3 million each time. He and Mnuchin are re-writing tax laws to save themselves a lot more than that.<br/>This is not to mention the many ways in which Trump uses the powers of office to improve the position of various family business interests. Yet, what we are really fixated on, is Barack Obama - private citizen - getting paid $400,000. 
I'm not sure I agree with the premise of the article - that retired presidents should avoid exploiting their fame for personal  gain after concluding the most difficult years of their lives. Perhaps it's true that they should avoid it because it resembles the buying of influence. Maybe there is a perception that you never really retire from a position that powerful, that buying a former president is a considerable asset to lobbyists, rent - seekers and the corrupt. But maybe there's nothing wrong with it as long as it's out in the open and free of quid pro quos (other than "I give you 400,000 quid and you give me some quotes"). certainly it pales before the culture of corruption, nepotism and plutocracy permeating the Trump administration. <br/><br/>Despite my ambivalence about the premise, I am glad to see the NYT taking a moral stand and applying it without favoritism or partisan hackery  to President Obama. It is always easy to criticize the opposition. It's especially easy when the opposition is so morally bankrupt, "king of moral debt" falls short in describing their champion. But real journalism, and real advocacy for the  public interest, cannot forget what's in our own backyard. 
Well he never did much for working people. Pushing TPP sending jobs overseas is one example. Nor did he help homeowners who were hit by the recession. He allowed REITs to buy the foreclosed properties for pennies on the dollar. Obama has been Wall Streets best friend for 8 years. All covered up with the distraction of identity politics.
I find it ironic that at the moment the first black president has the opportunity to avail himself and his family of the paid opportunities that other, non-black presidents, have been offered, there comes the  public chastising that he should set a different standard, accept less and donate more for doing the same work other former presidents have done. Were the Bush presidents, beneficiaries of generations of inherited wealth,  publicly shamed about what they should or should not have done with the money earned by giving speeches post white house? Slavery is over. Black people who have the credentials, done the same job, to the best of their abilities, are allowed to receive equal compensation. Let's wait until President Trump's time is over. Then let's talk about a former president set a higher standard for his compensation.
Assuming the presidency is like being paid for life, for the privilege. It is never to be traded upon. That should be the ongoing ethic, understood by all comers.
I couldn't agree more with the Times!  I think it reflects on the greediness of those that have a lot  - a  need to get what they  can when they can. I am disappointed in Obama and hope in future he curbs his appetite. Makes it difficult for those without to relate to this level of greed when they  are supporting their  families doing dishes in restaurants making sub-minimal wages while those with power debate endlessly the economic impact of raising wages to $15.00 an hour. We have become a divided country and Obama's agreement to accept almost a half million dollars for a speech further highlights the division.
I felt as if I had been kicked in the gut when I read that Obama had accepted $400,000 to share his words with a Wall Street firm. At this particular moment in time, seeing again how far removed from a basic, modest life our leaders, even our Democratic leaders, are, was not what I, a Democratic leaning voter, needed. It appears the billionaire class has managed to inculcate Mr. Obama with their values. SAD.
Charles Koch also abominates the wealthy's influence peddling. What he seeks is a market unfettered, undistorted by politicians, one that doesn't cut off opportunity or allow the successful to politically embed themselves on top. But he thinks it a fool's errand to try to use government to correct the wrongs of the past, and thus begins the parting of the ways with liberals. There is a deep-seated, longstanding suspicion of markets on the Left.<br/><br/>The Board's disapproval of this action by its beloved Barack Obama was not unforeseen. But is it a big problem? Did Clinton's economic policies appear corporate-built to anyone? The Democrats are "out of touch" because they stand for LGBT rights, secularism, and multiculturalism. There's a way to get back in touch: become Trump. Only a trifling number of votes are dictated by an economic platform. Besides, poor people would be worse, not better off in the closed world the anti-NAFTA crowd favors.<br/><br/>I agree that the rich have too much sway, but I don't agree that socialistic policies are sterling. People who complain about the former assume the latter would prevail in the former's absence. If this was true, I'd prefer plutocracy. The government already takes in a big percentage of our GDP. What is socialists' end game? Sweden? Perhaps politicians' distortions of markets, which are pervasive, slow growth, raise prices, and shut off opportunity, which angers people, who then demand more interference, and so on ad infinitum.
What a politician - e.g. Obama, Hillary Clinton, Bush et al - earns as a private citizen is completely up to him/her.<br/>What a politician - e.g. Trump - earns while in office is another issue, however. . . that's what we should not stop focusing on!
Yes, if Obama had any decency he would join a monastery, take a vow of silence, and renounce all material goods.  Like all the former presidents before him.
Ya know - after the pain he endured in his 8 years, I think he's entitled to some compensation.
Unless Mr. Obama distributes the majority of the $400,000 to legitimate charities, I am extremely disappointed. I may have to re-evaluate my opinion of him.
How sad that a venerated publication like the NYT, long a standard bearer for the people and party we ostensibly support, would rather lambaste a decent hard-working man and his family for earning his due after 8 years of selfless toil. Why can he not enjoy a vacation with celebrity friends and supporters, or earn the wage which the market decides he is worth? Good grief. <br/><br/>If there is any tone deafness involved it is undoubtedly on the Editorial Board's side of the table, not Obama's. 
Just when someone is tempted to believe something is too good to be true, they usually find out real fast that it isn't.  Thanks Barack for wasting no time providing us with the reality check.
Obama’s “too cool for school” refusal to be a cheer-leader for Democratic policies might have prevented Trump in the first place—now that Trump is here, the least Obama could do is step aside and not undermine those Democrats who, in the wake of Hilary Clinton’s tin-ear disaster of a campaign, are desperately trying to convince dubious voters that the party cares about their economic well-being.
It is none of our business what decisions Barack Obama makes now.  I trust his integrity totally.  What he does with his money, who pays him, etc. is not our concern.  Leave him alone.  He gave 8 years of his life to us.  Remove the microscope.  Let him be.  As other comments say, there are is so much we should pay attention to, let's do it.
How many hundreds of thousands of dollars do the Trumps make, WHILE he is in office, from his properties and name leasing?<br/>Please.
As one comedian articulated indelicately - Why does Obama have to be the first one to set an example of not receiving high fees for his speeches.  If the market is present, why not.  The NY Times place a high cost for post Presidential pride and honor while the current President doesn't even give a hoot about enriching himself while in office.   President Obama not taking fees or donating it to your chosen charity or foundation is not your decision. News media's lack of trust among the regular people is the same reason there is no trust in politicians, it's driven by ad revenue.  Whether its the paper, online or on television, news is compromised for the sake of ratings, only to drive up income from ads.  Honestly, we don't know what Obama plans to do with all his money, he might keep it all or give it away later to his foundation but this decision is not that of the media, its his and his family.  He may never be a Private citizen post Presidency but he can decide on his own,  the legacy not the media critics who finds money evil until they themselves can't separate their objectiveness from it.
The question is not why doesn't Obama hold himself to a higher standard but why is everyone, including the Times, jumping to hold him to a higher standard than all the white presidents who went before?  This happened throughout his presidency and is exceedingly tiresome.  The first black president doesn't just have to be exemplary in office in a way his predecessor were not, he has to be completely pure as a former president as well.
Isn't the free market enterprise system a major premise of capitalism and a stalwart principal of the Republican Party?<br/>I say kudos to President Obama if that is what he is worth in the open speaking fees market.<br/>What's the problem?
The problem with these speaking fees is the fear that current presidents will make decisions effecting Wall Street based on the knowledge that there are lucrative speaking fess waiting them after they leave office. Just bad optics Mr Obama. I am surprised you do not see this.
Why should Obama be held to a different (higher) standard than the rest of the ex-presidential pigs at the corporate trough? I'll tell you: because he represented a higher standard in so many domains, especially in his clear commitment to public service. We have entered an age defined by wealth concentration, and the power of that wealth to buy political influence. The plutocrats and their boundless greed have rightly become objects of scorn. Taking a 400K fee for a speech, on top of a $65 million book deal, simply means Obama has chosen to join the "fat-cats" (as he once called them). No doubt, he has earned it. But the Obama that so many voted for in 2008, and the kind of Democrat that we so desperately need right now, wouldn't want to be part of that detestable club.        
 "The Democratic Party badly needs such an example to follow" was the author of this article living in a cave during the Democratic primary for president? The Democrats have such an example; his name is Bernie Sanders. 
Obama is under no obligation to anyone but himself and his family given lawful activity. 
Everybody loves money. Even honest people.
President Obama is a private citizen. He holds no office, nor is he likely to ever run for one again. So if someone offers him money to speak it is up to him to decide if he wants to. He is unlikely to give Wall Street people the kind of message that will warm their charred hearts, so all the better
Every single president has gotten paid to make speeches after they leave office. Remember the 1 million Japan paid Reagan? At least Obama is getting paid for a speech, he is not making and changing laws to con and rob the country. How much money Trump has already grabbed from the American taxpayers?
All this about how much he was paid... what did he actually say to that group of bankers?
I would worry about a politician who is vying for the White House doing this and keeping the content secret.  I do not worry about a President who has already tried for 8 years to 'reign in Wall Street.'  His political career is over.  He'll never run for anything again.  And we don't have to worry that he says one thing but will do another, because his record is already history.  Let him earn what he can, but I do hope he will release the text of the speech.
Why is it "lamentable" that a former President make money? I'm no fan of the 1% but you completely lost me there.
I guess Hilary was right.Everybody does it.
That Mr. Obama would take $400,000 for a speech to Wall St. should surprise or disappoint no one who paid attention.  Mr. Obama governed as a wholly owned subsidiary of Wall St., the military-industrial complex, the permanent-war state, and the corporate profiteers.  Jamie Diamond infused the cash Mr. Obama needed to win the nomination in 2008. Mr. Obama oversaw the taxpayer bail-out of Wall St. while doing next to nothing for people whose homes, jobs and retirement savings disappeared in the greatest fraud of all time.  He brought no corporate officer to justice.  He took single payer health insurance off the table before the cards had even been dealt, and guaranteed Big Pharma and the health insurance-complex permanent, enormous  profits.  In office, he barely spoke of the country's poor, most of whom are children, and never made helping them a priority.  His most damaging legacy is not having done everything possible to make the Republicans pay a political price for "stealing" a Supreme Court seat.  Mr. Obama is the classic case of a politician whose actions put the lie to his rhetoric. Change You Can Believe In--you bet.  As he neared the end of his term, Mr. Obama lined up behind HRC, the ultimate corporatist and only person on the planet who could lose to an ignorant clown campaigning on overt appeals to racism, misogyny, religious bigotry and xenophobia.  How ironic that Mr. Obama is succeeded by one of the most visible leaders of the racist "birther movement."
Why shouldn't he take Wall Street's money?<br/><br/>So long as he gives them a speech to remember and uses the money for a good cause, it is a win-win as far as I am concerned.
Before you judge him on his Wall Street speaking engagement, shouldn't you at least hear what he has to say in the speech? To compare this to Hillary's, who was obviously, seemingly hypocritically, courting the Street for her presidential ambitions, and whose speech texts had to be leaked by Wikileaks, doesn't make sense. 
It's community activism, the community being Wall St., the activism being in Obama's bank account.
The thought that Barack Obama was in "public life to serve" is laughable.  He served only himself, as he continues to do. 
Great. The speech police. 
The Trump family pay for influence schemes are obscene and, frankly, I am sickened on a daily basis from this aberration in the highest office in the land.   I have no doubt that, post-presidency, Obama will continue to be the same principled and thoughtful person he has always been, and I expect that his speeches to Wall Street firms, among others, will carry messages that resonate in this perilous time.  I think selling out is the last thing we need to worry about with the Obamas.
Relax! Stop being holier than thou about how this private citizen raises money LEGALLY. And you have no idea whether the Obamas will build themselves guilded cages of gold with all the wealth or use it for good. Give him a break and stop making him into a Gandhi like figure. He is human, he is not swindling poor folks or selling snake oil. He is not hiding in offshore accounts or laundering money. Enough judging. 
Because he is just like any other politician.  This will come as news to liberals, he is not better than any other politician.  At least Trump does not even make the pretense of being so wonderful. The last presidents we had with any true integrity were Harry Truman and  General Eisenhower.  
This confirms that Obama is just like all the other presidents. I guess we will no longer be hearing that he is above it all, now that he proved he isn't. 
The 'optics' are bad. That's what this article should have said-- however, there's little need for an editorial. Obama should now DONATE 3/4 of his fee to a charity, perhaps one that assists poor mothers. That will earn him back his perch.
The Times (that liberal paper?) just hired a new conservative columnist for its op ed page----from the Wall St Journal editorial board, Bret Stephens. <br/><br/>His debut column –of all things---was to cast doubt on human caused climate change being the threat that scientists say. Thus he’s announcing he's firmly on the side of profits and power for biggest corporate donors to our election campaigns. What is the Times announcing with this pick?<br/><br/>Then, we read Obama will make speeches to big Wall St banks for 400,000---more than Hillary got. The prices are going up. What does this announce about our Dems and our democracy?<br/>Do we see a pattern here? 
Let's see:  He served in a clearly demanding and underpaid position for 8 years.  He has two kids to send to college. His wife, a high-earning worker, was out of the labor force for 8 years. He will not always have Secret Service protection, but was the most threatened president in history.  On top of that, for the free market crowd:  That fee is set by the market.  If nobody was willing to pay it, then he wouldn't get it.
He certainly learned a lot from the Clintons.
First time I have ever commented.  Could not help myself. This editorial is incredible! We have a President and family literally making millions off of their current government positions daily, and you chastise President Obama for accepting speaking fees? He is a private citizen and allowed to do what he pleases. Who are you to criticize this when every other celebrity, CEO, ex-Senator, ex-Congressman, ex-President, etc. can and does the same thing. It's incredible. This is the 3rd strike for me. NYTimes hired Bret Stephens; yesterday's headline about Trump having changed (LOL); and now this. Time to cancel my subscription.
There's an awful lot of unexamined privilege behind this editorial. I'm sorry to see the Times, which should know better, join the sanctimonious pile-on about Mr. Obama's speaking fees.
This is a typical straddle for the New York Times. At least this time they're doing it on the editorial page instead of the news pages.<br/><br/>I've subscribed to home delivery for more than 30 years. Perhaps it's time for the masthead to change to "All the news that's fit to print and whatever else we want to throw in."
Always thought BOB was mostly interested in being the first Black President, an as such he is in some regards a racist.  My thought is anyone supporting Black Lives Matter Movement likely believes blacks deserve special treatment and that laws don't equally apply to them.  They talk of "white privilege" with disdain and dismiss they idea that hard work and education pays off with dividends and earning power.  That is not entitlement or privilege but is return on investment.  That is equal for all and a common denominator.  Teach and believe that and your live will be better and matter as much as all others.
It's a bad look, and looks matter.
After the grueling 8 years he's just spent sweating blood to be a good president, I think he's allowed to make some easy money. Probably, he'll also make speeches, without payment, to espouse the causes he's interested in. 
Much ado about very little.
All this hand-wringing is rather tardy and somewhat beside the point.  We all knew where Obama's core values really lay when immediately upon taking office he put Big Larry Summers and Little Timmy Geithner in charge of financial policy.  At this juncture turning down a fat Wall Street speaking fee would simply be pious hypocrisy.
I am ashamed of the NYT for raisinf an issue with Mr. Obama being paid for his speeches.  He deserves every cent of the money he is paid for providing others insight on his experience and wisdom, and what he does with the money he receives is his problem not anyone else's.  The NYTimes should look for real news to report on and real ethic problems to address.  That duality that the NYT and other liberal media hold Democrats to much higher standards than Republicans is the reason why we have the kind of "non-goverment" we currently have.
If someone were willing to pay you $400k for a speaking engagement, I hope you would take it, and that no one would scoff at you about it in the Times. Getting paid what someone is willing to pay you is not shameful.<br/><br/>He worked a job for the past 8 years at a much lower salary than he would have gotten elsewhere with his resume, and now he has an opportunity to catch up a bit. Wall Street can afford it.
Of highly paid speakers in the world, Trump leads the pack. He was paid $1.5 million for some of his speeches as a private citizen. The only way you can get exercised over Obama's fee is if you genuinely believe that the former president and leader of the free world, the most admired man IN THE WORLD nine years running (Gallup), should come cheaper as a speaker than Tony Blair.<br/><br/><a href="http://publicspeaking.co.ke/post/10-highest-paid-public-speakers-in-the-world" title="http://publicspeaking.co.ke/post/10-highest-paid-public-speakers-in-the-world" target="_blank">http://publicspeaking.co.ke/post/10-highest-paid-public-speakers-in-the-...</a> 
So former President Obama made as much in an hour or so of speaking as Donald will make in a whole year of being president.<br/><br/>The more I think about this, the more I think Wall Street got a really great deal.
Market forces are at work here.  Why should he ignore them? 
I think President Obama should do what he feels is right. I trusted him for eight years and voted for him twice. I am very proud of his behavior in and out of office. I trust him and his judgement.
Could this author kiss Obama's behind any more throughly, while still taking a cheap shot at Trump and his wife. " Mr. Obama is a pathbreaking figure and established writer whose two terms traversed a stormy period economically, militarily and diplomatically. Through his writing, Mr. Obama could shed important light on his decision making. As a couple and a family, the Obamas brought grace, empathy and high standards to their time in the White House, in stark contrast to the workaday vulgarity of its current occupants. " The drone bombing child killer is no better than any of them. And everyone knows Ayres was the ghost writer for Obama's books. Good grief.
I expect that Obama's paid for his insight and understanding of government more than for his influence as a former president. He doesn't have the ear of anyone in the Trump administration, and the Dems can't do much to change Ryan-McConnell policy. <br/><br/>And so far as setting an example? Well the Dems had Obama for eight years, and Senators Warren and Sanders have been sounding the charge continuously.  So far the DNC isn't tuned in. Whether Obama accepts a large speaking fee or none at all is below the radar.
We like Obama, and we helped him out with donations and votes, but he was always suspect as a non-adversary of Wall Street. Perhaps he is just non-adversarial by nature. Also possible is that he is now simply receiving his due as the celebrity speakers' market legally allows. The genesis of all the knee-jerk opposition to government regulations began after crash at the end of G. W. Bush administration. Wall Street movers and shakers made sure the word got out that they did not need (any stinking) regulation, and the contagion against all regulation, sensible or not, took over the right-wing movement and moved the nation's political needle. After an incredible loss of wealth for a vast majority of Americans, Obama never endorsed or supervised any meaningful changes, and the perpetrators never took a hit. They won, and maybe Obama was always ready to be one of them too.
We need to retire this "ordinary Americans" idea since it implies that if you're not a white Republican you're not American. As if all the millions of people who aren't white or living in rural areas and factory towns aren't really Americans. "Ordinary" is a code word for a certain class and racial demographic. In reality Latino and black Americans are also "ordinary" as are "urban liberals" and "academics" and everyone else the GOP has branded as suspect. Trump didn't even garner a majority of votes, and yet we talk about him as if he's representative of "real America". Enough already. If you were born in the country, you're an ordinary American regardless of your income, job, race, educational attainment or church attendance.
I think President Barack Obama is extremely smart and is worth the $400K fee and he earned it. <br/><br/>Why does the author not criticize the athletes who cash millions of dollars per pay.  Or the actors who earn $1M per episode.  <br/><br/>Also, I don't understand why the author thinks that Mr. President will not donate this money to charity.   Mr. President can decide if and whom he might donate and on his own time and terms.  Why must he choose a Charity now and give media more drama to write about?  He might as well donate this money at later time to the charity of his choosing without creating headlines. 
As long as politics in the USA are essentially conducted by money, there will be $400,000 speeches.  I do not begrudge President Obama his speaking fee.  He and his family served the country with grace and distinction.  They so greatly deserved their "holiday with billionaires" after the grueling past eight years.
The problem is Obama was too soft on banks and tech. The softness on tech, allowing monopoly, can be explained by (1) modern tech companies aren't traditional monopolies, (2) tech is wildly competitive [it would have been unnecessary to break up Yahoo in 1999], (3) they're generally liberal, urbane, cosmopolitan like himself, (4) these are American national champions projecting soft power around the world.<br/><br/>While it's hard to rationalize a comparable reasons for a Democrat going soft on banks, he apparently had one, and hopefully it wasn't speaking fees.
Early in his post-presidential years, Ronald Reagan accepted two MILLION dollars for speeches he gave in Japan. When an indignant Daniel Schorr asked Jimmy Carter for his thoughts on this, Carter replied, "If I were offered a million dollars to give a speech, I would accept immediately." A million dollars would fund a lot of Habitat houses.
I am not surprised that Obama took 400K for this speech, nor I was surprised when I saw the pictures of him having fun with Richard Branson after he left the White House. If there is anything I have learned in my life is that everybody has a price and the best way not to betray anyone is to not put yourself into a situation that could cause you a perceived or real conflict of interests. Let's assume for the sake of argument that in 2006 Obama was this pure, incorruptible soul -although his dealings with Tony Rezko would suggest otherwise. The notion that anybody could go from middle class, to receiving praise, money and gifts from the uber-wealthy and not end up not changed -namely corrupted in some way- is pure fantasy. Before this, there were his net neutrality rules that miraculously protected Google/Facebook's business model or his push for TPP that clearly favored companies like Apple. So in a way, $400K for a speech is peanuts compared to the other things he did while in power to favor those who financed his election campaigns. 
I have no problem wit president Obama making a nice living earned through speaking fees and books. I do, though, hold him to a much higher standard than that of the money-hungry Clinton's. It sounds like both the president and Michelle will be banking a huge amount through book deals - how much more money does one need? Of course, the means earned may well be donated back to their foundation, or other worthy charities - time will tell. Maybe I am a little idealistic, but I do put the Obama's above what we currently have in the White House, and what we've had for the past few decades. President Carter - no matter what your politics are - sets the Gold Standard for former presidents - a selfless, giving, gentleman to the end.
I believe former Presidents should have to wait longer before accepting paid work from certain highly regulated industries. It's like how Pentagon officials who work in procurement need to wait a certain number of years before they are allowed to work in the defense industry. However, there is no rule against what Obama is doing, and he is just doing what former Presidents of both parties have done. It's a bit hypocritical to criticize Obama for failing to a non-rule that no former President had been forced to adhere to. <br/><br/>Also, Obama is a private citizen now. He is not in any public office. He is not running for public office. What kind of sense does it make to be angry about a private citizen getting paid $400,000 dollars when the current President is deeply entangled in personal and family business interests. This includes making taxpayers pay an estimated $1-3 million for each trip to his own resort (including making the Secret Service rent golf carts so they protect Trump while golfing)?
The current President is apparently held to no standard while Barack Obama was and is held to the highest standards? Focus on what matters - and that is the corruption and influence of special interests in the current administration.
This moralistic attitude that someone cannot sell his services at what the market values it at is why we have Donald Trump in the White House. Clearly, whatever fees he and Michelle get are not for political favors. Like movie stars, they are cashing in on their value while it is still in demand -- not for long most likely. They have shown themselves to be charitable and I am sure a good bit of what they get for their speeches will go to their foundation. Let's not make the easy by shallow argument for a new standard. There is no standard. Nor there needs to be one.
"but it is disheartening that a man whose historic candidacy was premised on a moral examination of politics".  A moral examination of politics?   That has no basis in reality.  Obama was no more and no less than your average politician.  
President Obama served his country with dignity and grace during very difficult times.  His quick response saved jobs and prevented a recession from becoming a depression.  Had he not been hampered by those who didn't want him to succeed he might have done more to help the everyday Americans and might have expanded the new deal/great society policies that the Democrats have long championed.<br/><br/>Who are we to judge him for accepting speaking fees now that he's a private citizen.  Why is he held to a higher standard than previous presidents.  This notion that in earning money he's somehow tarnishing the presidency is ridiculous and without merit.  Let the man live his life.
Why is it always left up to the Democrat and, increasingly, minorities, to set the example for good behavior in this country?<br/><br/>Is it because President Trump has revealed to us that rural white America lives a life so full of negative social pathologies that, by comparison, those folks living in the "inner cities" are able to make more of themselves with what they have to work with?
So sick of the double standard for Democrats versus Republicans. The harsh reality is that Democrats, by their very nature - with a few exceptions, including the entertainment industry - make very little money.<br/><br/>It's going to take MONEY to win elections, folks. The Democrats are up against some of the wealthiest people and corporations in the world who vote Republican and support Republican. This is especially a problem now with Citizens United.<br/><br/>For those of you who don't know, the Citizens United ruling by the Supreme Court prohibited the government from restricting independent political expenditures by nonprofit corporations, for-profit corporations, labor unions and other associations.<br/><br/>Go make money, Mr. Obama. You and we as Democrats are going to need it. People need to stop with the double standard in lots of ways.
President Obama could not take a vacation, play golf, associate with whomever he wanted to or even fly in Air Force One without being condemned by the Republicans for doing so. I have yet to hear a peep from them about the Trump Crime Family blatantly ripping off the Americans who actually pay their taxes. Make no mistake about it, it's all about race. When white presidents did the same things it wasn't a problem but somehow when a Black president did them he wasn't "entitled" to the same treatment.
The Democrats are the new republicans because they've been in power for so long. The real democrats right now are the independent progressives and Trump supporters. 
Welcome to politics. It may be disheartening to the NYT that their hero is just like any other politician, but the truth is that the mantle of so-called idealism that the NYT and Obama put on their shoulders is see-through and the emperor is naked, as is his mouthpiece.<br/>If there is a demand for paying Obama to listen to him, then that is supply and demand. Nothing wrong. If Obama would really be as pure as the NYT portrays him, then he should give royalties and speech money away to charities.
Oh please save us from the NYT's crocodile tears of a wonderful ex president, a man universally acknowledged to have extremely high moral standards, taking payment for a speech to WS! Oh the shame the shame! really NYT"s? YOU should be ashamed for the articles all through the campaign from Amy Chozick - filled with opinion, yet on your news page rather than opinion page - deriding HRC for ....emails - the scandal, the scandal.<br/>I am not suggesting that the NYT's should ever turn a blind eye to corruption or malfeasance from our politicians , even those we champion; but this false equivalency is nonsense. Please spare us this faux socialism , playing perfectly into the hands of the right! "Obama ! How dare he accept funds ! Become rich! how dare he!"<br/>Really? perhaps the NYT's should give their paper away ....for free! you know a "free press" <br/><br/>Please save us from your hysteria of one our most uncorrupted President in history, making money AFTER his presidency has ended. Instead cry for the corruption of our government as it is now, from our current Mayor, Governor ( both dems by the way ) to the highest ( now lowest ) office in the country. <br/><br/>Spare us from those tears of regret you exhibit in this column, and place them where they should be. 
The man was punished enough for being the first black President. No need to pile on with your elitist moralizing now. He has debts to pay and a future to fund. He didn't ask for the fee. But it's fine if he accepts the offer. 
yadda yadda yadda so what's new<br/>do as i do, not as i say
Give him the dignity and public trust he deserves. He will deliver much-needed, thoughtful reflections to Wall Street financiers.  Do you really believe he will pocket $400,000 and not give it to his own foundation?  
I don't have any problem with Obama hitting the speech circuit.  He deserves to live well after his contributions to the country.
Obama is a charlatan. I'm surprised after all this time you guys didn't know that.
But it's OK for the NYT to profit from writing about Obama's speeches.
What a cheap shot. I'm disappointed to see this from the Times.
Yes it must be emotionally difficult for the New York Times to see that their god Obama is just another grubby politician reaching for cash from Wall Street.
Could it just be that he had all his supporters fooled this whole time?  Yeah looks like it....
SHAME!!!
This editorial is condescending and a waste of time. 
Nah. Don't worry Democrat's this article is totally wrong. Don't be stupid and believe the neo-liberalism the Clinton and Obama administration foisted on the country has caused problems. The country is doing great, take at your look diverse regions such SF suburbs, DC suburbs, and NY suburbs are any of them really that much worse than they were? On the other hand, a transexual lesbian half Apache half Latina half Black-Irish cripple at Harvard was recently criticized by a Bigot for wearing a lime green dress with purple polka dots and a shirt that had Star Wars spelt wrong, the bigots. I'm crying as I write these words, truly heartbreaking. Especially when compared to the minor problems of the non-elite, like declining wages, illegal immigration, trade, wars, and crony capitalism. Always remember focus is important, end discrimination in our Ivy League colleges. 
Do you folks realize how predictable your comments are? 
He's living up to the standard of every white man that preceded him, glorified in the NYTimes. NOW you have a problem with it? Interesting...
Really? Of course the Black president must also be a beacon of humility and perfection. Why hold him to the same standard of say, #45? Oops, almost forgot - double standards exist for a reason. Go make that money Obama, this newspaper and many treated you like garbage (charming references to Barry) and gave #45 millions in free advertisement (for years). Please with the hand-ringing, there is a kleptomaniac in the White House, write about that instead.
Who really cares? All the teeth gnashing because he is letting the mask fall? Lots of us have known for 8 years who and what he is. That the editorial board of the New York Times acts surprised that he is not the pure, the value driven person that the Board attached their hopes to speaks lowly of your ability to devine the truth. It is just more mud to wipe from your gullible and self promoting faces. Grow up!
I am sorry to have to say it, but this article is pure pap!  Articles like this convinced people that Clinton was evil and look were that got us!  Obama didn't extort this money, it was offered to him by people who felt it was worth it to them.  Why should he refuse it?  He certainly needs it for for his foundation, or should he fund that with his pocket money?
It's tragic to see how far journalism has fallen.<br/>Or how little self examination has, is or will occur by it's propaganda arm.<br/>NYT was such a great resource for so many years.<br/>And yet, it seems destined to follow the self delusionary track of its political wing- the Democratic party.<br/>Based on the comments section, your readership also seems mortally out of touch with reality and destined to experience more heartache in the primaries.<br/>This People Magazine puff piece is so insane it's hard to believe the Editorial Board will allow it to be attached to them.<br/>You think you are so clever, but these slight little jabs don't go unnoticed and they will ultimately be nails in your coffin.<br/>All of this is so sad. The NYT "picks" are hilarious, of course.<br/>But my primary reaction is sadness.<br/>You folks embolden and increase the attitudes espoused by Drudge, Breitbart, etc. with your lack of competence or your own moral shallowness. But mostly your lack of integrity. It's like a literary version of Berkeley.<br/>Every commenter shares some accountability for the loss of the POTUS, the judicial branch, both houses of Congress and the bulk of governorships.<br/>And yet you still defend this depraved man, and your ideology.<br/>You've projected your own weaknesses.<br/>You've become the enemy.<br/>Obama. the NYT and it's comment section, like a mirrored funhouse of hypocrisy and self-projection.
Why should he not make as much money as he possibly can to lead a comfortable life. He served us well for 8 years and is entitled to it.<br/><br/>Leave him alone and save your criticisms for the buffoon you guys help elect. I don't see anyone looking into unreimbursed cost to the taxpayer for the far flung Trump clan on non government business.<br/><br/>To think I consider myself a fan of the NYTimes! 
Oh for God's sake let's grow up and recognize that the personal appearance industry is real and it's a big business unto itself.  "The Rubber Chicken Circuit," has been around forever and it's legal.  The only reason to point at the Obamas is to embarrass them.  Please stop.  Trump and his 7 little Goldmanites kissing the Russians on the lips is embarrassment enough.  If you want to chase presidential cash find out what Trump is charging us per meal at his clubs, so he can fill his fat face!  Oops, too angry?  Nah . . . in Trump World steal is next to Godliness.
here we go, now the NYT can start to vilify another Democrat.
PS: I truly expected the lead editorial this morning to be all about the horrid invitation of mass murderer Duterte to the White House.<br/><br/>Has Bret Stephens totally changed The NY Times overnight?
The NYT's hypocrisy in forming this opinion is astounding.  Of course, the optics are terrible, and the Republicans will pick up on this faster than the appearance of a kestral makes song birds scatter from the feeder.  Obama has a new job, and good for him if he can accumulate wealth that will never approach what The Donald's daddy gave him to get started in business, or the amount that The Donald has stiffed from business associates.  Is Obama worth less than a major league athlete or a rock star -- or Wilbur Ross?  Will he make as much in retirement as the net worth of the owner of the "failing NYT"?  <br/><br/>The editorial bespeaks a double standard for former Presidents of the US and every other citizen.  Obama is and will ever be a paragon of the American dream.  He doesn't need to return to poverty in rural Hawaii or a Chicago ghetto to prove his worth to the nation.
He promised racial equality and now he’s worth millions and blacks are still the least prosperous in the world.  Could the cause be media/education propaganda encouraging blacks  into effortless reliance upon socialist shysters like Obama to enrich them all by exploiting others.   If only the media/education propagandists weren’t ego ridden slime, preening as civil rights activists, but claiming  that the government enforced redistribution currently sending huge chunks of  everyone’s money to the 1% they all pretend to hate will result in “equality.”    Yeah, right...only if liberal-think has convinced one that the consequences of political action can be ignored, because what will never succeed, eventually will.  Liberalism is a religion, perpetually praying to politicians to command reality into their preferred circumstances. 
Yeah, and Al Gore has a huge house!  The Clintons are cozy with the Saudis. Obama vacations with billionaires and movie stars. But IOKIYAR. The audacity of tropes.
Perhaps the Obamas possess just a little more of that 'workaday vulgarity' than you care to entertain?
It is interesting to note, regarding "every former president but Jimmy Carter has supped at the corporate table",  that this really began with,  guess who,  Bill Clinton (Reagan was with senile dementia so he did so minimally, if at all)!!    To paraphrase  Reagan  ,   "there you go again",  back to  The Clintons,   chasing the big bucks.     Had something to do with HRC's loss, me thinks!   
Get a life! President Obama got it from both ends during his two terms in office.  Now he is getting paid for his valuable time and he will never be running for office again.  What's the problem?  With any luck, he can open some eyes in the audience at these events.
At least you don't have to worry about Obama secretly spying on journalists now.
We have a president who just invited Rodrigo Duterte for an official visit and you're worried about Obama accepting money to give a speech?  We all miss Obama but try to keep some perspective.  We have a president who is working very hard to destroy our nation, and as a former president, Obama is earning a living.
These speaking fees surprised me, a liberal Democrat who twice voted for Barack Obama. I do wonder what it feels like to hang out with the likes of Richard Branson, Oprah Winfrey and Tom Hanks. Do you feel poor in their company? I do not know what I would do if I were in their shoes. As for the book contracts, why is this advance necessary? Will the books earn back the advance? This advance means books, perhaps important ones, will not get practiced.
This editorial assumes that Obama will keep his speaking fee.  No one knows that.  It seems that the Times editorial board has learned nothing since it went after Hillary Clinton for her speaking fees and private email server.  Gentlemen and Ladies of this board, you and other major media outlets chase after shiny objects instead of substance during the 2016 are part of the reason we now have a President Trump.  How about going after Trump for his using the presidency as a cash cow and the GOP looking the other way?  How about admitting and owning your responsibility for helping Trump get elected and demonizing Clinton?  How about strongly supporting an independent investigation into the Russian issue?  There is so much that endangers our country right now and you've got your panties in a bunch over the Obamas' speaking fees?  A clear reason why I downgraded my seven-day subscription to just weekends.  If this delusional focus continues, I may have to go to one day a week and then none.  Be a force for good in this awful situation that you and your fellow media put us in,
Seriously?   This is one of the very few times I'm in disagreement with the Times.   We have no idea how Obama plans to use the $.  Hopefully some charitable and some for his daughters' education and retirement.   He came into the White House modestly.   In order to level the playing field among the other side, some of the left needs to have access to greater capital.   The real issue is why more $ isn't finding its way from corporate America to the needs of the community.   
Oh FFS enough with this nonsense. The man is out of office and never again going to hold elected office. But no, you scolds in the NYT editiorial board want to hold the black man to a higher moral standard than a regular president. This self righteous preening is what led to a clown occupying the White House and if these elections have proven anything at all, it's that voters are a lazy uninformed hypocrites.
I'm reminded of that great quote from Atlas Shrugged: "When faced with an apparent contradiction, check your premises"  For those confused or disappointed by Obama's capitalist opportunism, reconsider your mistaken impression of him - you know, the one sold to the American people by his marketing firm/campaign mgr Axelrod.  You bought the story whole-cloth and never bothered to vet it, or question it.  How could you? If you tried, you'd be labelled "racist".  The truth is that both barack and michelle have ALWAYS followed the money, the trade-in for political necessity.  It was michelle that got a 300% raise, when barack agreed to run for the senate.  It was barack who took a book deal - when he had absolutely nothign to write - and got billy ayers to write a fraudulent "autobio" for him.  Even this author calls BarryO "an established writer", when any sentient thinker can see that neither book was written by the character that most recently played president. Barry started the celbrity shoulder-rubbing early, made a joke of the Office fo the Presidency, used his job title to gain access and celebrity for himself, and his family, at every turn.  No surprise here, for those of us who never bought the premise.
Oh yeah, make the black guy do it.
What a horrifying editorial. I have no more to say because of my disgust. After all he was put through by all the other legislators, he should be lauded.
I am so glad I renounced Obama last year when he threw his support behind Hillary. I suspected he had become part of the 1% by then, like the Clinton’s did. With Obama’s betrayal, the Democratic party has lost one of the few voices that could have lead them out of the wilderness. His decision to blatantly squander his post-presidential political capital for a $400,000 paycheck makes me want to throw up! If he’s going to cash 9n, then I want to cash in too on the many hours I spent campaigning for him! Where my cut, Mr. Obama???  
I am totally SHOCKED! Your icon liberal, Barack Obama, illustrates that he and his wife are just as money-grubbing as other phony liberal Democrats. And he did a lot of money-grubbing BEFORE he was elected but you folks in the media never covered it. And now you sit and pant over the release of the Obamas' memoirs, thinking it will be textbook-like in content. Never answered - How did 2 books written by a little-known senator from Illinois, who served about 3 years in the Senate, gain such acclaim BEFORE he even was elected president? Somebody was jerking his chain and you frauds promoted THIS fraud. He was an empty-suit candidate; an empty-suit president, and now, an empty-suit ex-president - who still fancies himself in the Oval. He did NOTHING to improve this country and our standing in the world; in fact, he diminished it. That was the goal of Obama and his left-wing supporters, including some of the media.
Is NYT raising an ethical issue or a moral one about a former President who is now a private citizen?<br/><br/>Maybe they need to look more closely at the current President, who is bending every ethical &amp; moral rule, in using the Presidency to the benefit his wealth &amp; business interests.
Well, the plutocrats extract money from the proletariat &amp; the taxpayer &amp; according to the educated Trump supporter, can't be bought. Ergo, ex-president Obama, if he continues to reap dollars from the plutocrats will soon be in a position to be incapable of being bought too!<br/>Wait a minute. I seem to remember appliance dealers offering a "buy now, pay later" plan. Uh-oh.
Give me a break, NYT.
Trump will host Duterte and this innocuous action by a past president worries you?
After all the abuse he took during his tenure, he's entitled to<br/>make hispown choice about speaking fees. Judge not lest ye be judged.
I'm very surprised he accepted this fee. We can debate how deserving President Obama is. Entitlement is subjective. But 400,000 dollars to speak to a Wall Street firm is right there in black and white. I hope this is the last one of this nature. He's not doing himself any favors. With the double book deal filling the family coffers, how much is enough? A question former President Obama might have asked at one time. Will be curious to see the transcript of the speech - if it's made public. 
Why is it wrong for Barack Obama to accept a paid speaking engagement from a Wall Street firm, since he no longer is in office and is already on record about the dangers and duties of big banks and brokerage houses?<br/><br/>Is it the $400,000? The going rate for speaker fees for celebrities from every field has climbed very high in recent years, but it should not be forbidden fruit for a former president. Would $200,000 be okay? $100,000? $50,000?<br/><br/>Is Wall Street the problem? We should be glad when leaders of the investment industry hear from a voice outside their immediate sphere of influence. Given the role of Goldman Sachs in the current White House, we should hope that Goldman is the firm which extended the invitation.<br/><br/>There is a valid argument against the Republican effort to break the backs of the working class by breaking the budget with tax breaks for the rich.<br/><br/>The argument is diminished when a prominent news organization like The New York Times takes a position which suggests that Democrats are mired in the politics of envy.
Companies begrudge workers $15 minimum wage and rush to replace them with robots, visa holders or just ship the jobs to another country. The working and middle classes are struggling. Real wages have been stagnant since  the late 1990's. Meanwhile there is a greater divide between the haves and have nots. Some segments of the country have done very very well the last 20 years. Obama getting 400k for a speech is just a symptom of the problem. The corporate/political class is setting the agenda.
He's not expected to take a vow of poverty after his Presidency.  And given what he's endured during his term in office, I'm inclined to let him take those funds. <br/><br/>But Hillary said it best (to paraphrase). . ."it's what they offered'. 
This is not a proper mode of delivery of a message to the Obamas.  Members of the Times editorial board, and others concerned about the issue, should write Mr. Obama and express their views.  With these views in mind, the Obamas should decide the manner and amount of their charitable giving.  If rich people are willing to part with vast sums to hear Barack Obama speak, let them.  It is probably a question merely of "what the market will bear."  I trust the Obamas not to change the tenor of their post-Presidency advocacy to meet the needs and purposes of those paying for their services.  
Obama currently doesn't hold a public office, so him collecting speaking fees is not a pay-to-play legal bribe. <br/><br/>We should be noting how much people are donating to Trump's campaign, since he started collecting campaign funds for 2020 almost as soon as he was inaugurated. We should be looking at how these donations correlate with his policy-making decisions, his administration appointments, and even his advertisements on Twitter.<br/><br/>We should also be demanding that his 2017-2019 tax returns eventually be released so we can also see the correlations between who pays him and which way he blows with the wind. <br/><br/>We should also be looking at these relationships between donors and policy decisions among Congressmen, and we should be making laws that address both rules and punishments for public officials, including the President, who use their office for personal, financial gain. <br/><br/>I'm not afraid that anyone can now pay Obama to destroy our country, because he doesn't have the power to anymore. We need to focus on the people who currently have the power to sacrifice our welfare for more money and power. We need to hold the President and Congresspeople accountable if we are to preserve our liberty and our welfare.
This editorial and the most recommended comments overlook the latent conflict of interest for any incumbent president if the norm is sustained that $5,000,000 to $10,000,000 a year of speaking fees awaits any former president, who hasn't too seriously crossed the financial interests of those paying the speaking fees.<br/><br/>In the case of Obama, the failure to re-segregate commercial and investment banking in the wake of the 2008-09 financial crash is a prime case of speaker-fee friendly behavior, which happens to leave the economy exposed to huge unwarranted risk.<br/><br/>Compensation for presidents should be increased substantially and those who serve some minimum time should retire at a hefty percentage of that salary --maybe 80%.  In turn their speaker fee compensation and memoir royalties should be heavily taxed.  The presidency should not be a vehicle for an incremental increase in net worth of 8 or 9 digits.<br/><br/>Were Barack Obama still a U.S. senator, would the Obamas have just signed mega contracts for books?  Of course not.<br/><br/>After his presidency Harry Truman declined an offered corporate board seat with the response "You don't me, you want the presidency of the United States, and the presidency is not for sale." 
Has he released the transcript of the speech?  I would like to read it.  After that I may judge.  If his speech addressed the lost values of the corporate and Wall Street world that mostly pay service not to employees but rather to the investor class, then I might say go for it.  But, no one should forget that the investor class is the impetus behind corporate decision-making.  Those people who put their trust in people who trust such corporations are living in a fools paradise.  That's the reason why Trump and his minions are so beyond my credulity.  Are Trump and Obama, in the end, the same.  I think not and I hope not, but it is hard to tell sometimes by their friends and acquaintances.
There is something thing wrong with Obama's accepting this fee: it sends a terrible message to the public about who he is and about the democratic party in general. He should make free speeches instead, say to unions and children's rights advocates. <br/><br/>The leaders of the democratic party need to be conscious of both their own image and that of the party. They need to show in word, deed, and nuance that they support and identify with ordinary people, not wealthy bankers.<br/><br/>Finally, why should having been president entitle you to be wealthy? Presidents already get an excellent pension.
His speaking fees show the false heart of many politicians, generous more for what they want than for what they can deliver or give to anyone else that costs them alone. Obama's career shows that he has never been the kind of politician interested so much in the electoral office he wins as the one he has yet to win.<br/> Unlike Mayor Harold Washington, for instance, whose ambition seemed to be all about urban improvement in Chicago, Obama's personal ambitions, in comparison, has seemed to always be about other goals. And we see his legacy in the terrible gang street shootings he left in Chicago's poorest minority neighborhood.<br/>A  positive legacy for Obama would be as Mayor of Chicago, a really demanding job.  As President,  he only had to preside over people who did the work, say, of national health care insurance bearing his name; so his input could not be evaluated apart from his Cabinet. But as Chicago's Mayor we would be able to judge, objectively and fairly, initiatives directly linked to him. And he wouldn't appear seem as  avaricious as his excessive speaking fees make him appear.
President Obama is probably in the highest income tax bracket.   This money will be probably be written off as an expense, then taxed at Obama's rate. With advances on his book deal and other speaking engagements, he will almost certainly be in the highest tax rate of 39.5, and if he settles in Hawaii after his kids get out of school, he will be subject to an 11% state tax will probably give him an effective tax rate of maybe 33%.  The EFFECTIVE corporate tax rate is in the low 20's, I've heard.   So we are better off as a society if the money is paid to him and taxed.  I'd say we should encourage him to give all the speeches he has time for, and to charge whatever he can get.  I trust him to pay his taxes, as he has generally made his returns public, unlike our so-called president, who was busted for not filing his foundation's returns.  
What is it about President Obama that requires him to be more transparent, more ethical, more sensitive, more bipartisan, more conciliatory, more dignified,  more of a model, more “tone-perfect” than other Presidents?…oh, never mind; I know.
What exactly is the purpose of this article? The Obamas gave more than eight years of their lives to the highest service to their country. They are not beholden to the country, the country is beholden to them. They are not lobbying for personal interest but rather trying to influence those with money and power to be their best selves. <br/><br/>That we even have to defend the Obama's to the Times is ludicrous. The country currently has a leader that does not seem to respect his office, tradition or even the constitution. This leader has no problem using his public office to further enrich himself and his family. Where are the priorities of the Times to choose to trumpet this message over all the other potential issues of the day. That many have engaged in this debate does not justify it as a reasoned choice especially when many others like myself are commenting on the judgement of the Times and not on the judgement of the Obamas. <br/><br/>Finally, that Mr Obama, who is not is any elected position or speaking on behalf of anyone but his private self can command these fees, only speaks to the esteem in which he and his thoughts are held.
All former presidents do speaking engagements and are very well paid.  It is unfair to hold our first black president to a different standard, especially when our current president seems to have no conscience at all when it comes to lining his golden pockets and those of his family while he is actually IN office. 
Give me a break.  $400,000 in the scheme things is hardly a bribe. it is not going to change much for anyone, not in the context of lobbyist earning $25M from foreign government.  This business of morality as a way to argue against the left and those not really on the ideological right is farcical.  Trump and his millions using the white house as heist to improve his brand increase his rates and cash has not lost him a single per centage point in ratings.<br/>why make it an issue for someone who is earning an honest living.
Seeing how corrupt our political system is it takes a saint to resist all the money.<br/>Former President Carter is great if for no other reason than to be the true humble humanist he is.  Mr. and Mrs Carter are just one of a kind and he was a good president too.    
Even if his ethics weren't already above reproach, there are no dots to be connected between speaking fees and nefarious deeds: Obama has nothing to peddle, in the form of executive orders, legislation, plum government jobs, etc. At most he might help someone's kid get a summer volunteer gig at the DNC. Unlike the problematic fees collected by Hillary/Bill, Obama has no more political candidacies in his future, no promises he could make if he wanted to. LeBron James makes $400,000 for one basketball game. That's the market at work. So is BO's speaking fee.
President Barack Obama, throughout his presidency, congratulated himself for an economy that obscenely benefited the one percent. He and the insulated Democratic elite drove the desperate middle-class groundswell that elected Donald Trump. Sadly, they remain clueless.
I adamantly disagree with your take on our sterling president's recompense for a speech.  I deem it a false equivalence to some arbitrary standard of ethics that are totally dated and irrelevant.  I would applaud his receiving a million dollars per speech.  He proved himself worthy of the office and represented this country splendidly.  He didn't arrive at the WH a billionaire and the attacks on his golfing ventures and vacations were made by a private citizen named Donald J. Trump whose own golfing and vacation---those trips to Mar-a-Loco are an embarrassment and a violation of the emolument clause.  The Obama family was more than frugal and prudent in private expenses.
What is $400,000 in a country that appears not to know what is too much?
Why is it bad to make money or be a part of the 1%? That's what has made America, well,  America. It's what you do with your money and time that matters. Single person's opinion. 
With our democracy being dismantled bit by bit, on a daily basis, by a self-centered, ignorant, uninformed, immoral, lying, bully, there are more important matters to address than another private citizen/former  politician getting obscene  fees for speaking to those with the money to pay such fees.  One "lie" ( a statement known to be false made with the intent to deceive) by the President of the United States causes immeasurable harm on a national and international basis. The editorial board would better serve the public by (i) by not assigning a higher moral imperative to one politician as opposed to another, and (ii) by daily calling out the perpetrator of  unending lies and not wasting time and space of  not wasting time and space on a former politician's current speaking income.
I have no problem with President Obama being paid what the market will bear. I have no doubt that President and Mrs. Obama will use that money for good. Unlike the current occupant of the White House.
Did you ever ask any of the white former presidents not to accept speaking fees? 
I invite readers to an auction of Donald Trump's first post-presidential speech. Whatever readers decide,  I would ask him to contribute all of it to the ACLU to help right the wrongs done by his policies.
Sure, I'd jump to give the lucrative speech, too, but not if there was a scintilla of a possibility that I would ever again serve, formally or informally (i.e. in any way that might have influence) on matters where I was supposed to put the public good first (you know, the 99.9%), any kind of public service. I think Obama likely will. It's not the money that's the problem; it's where it comes from. He should have been satisfied with the book deal.
President Obama's coherent and cogent commentary in complete sentences is more precious by comparison with the current occupant. Considered remarks and the wisdom of experience deserve reward commensurate with their premium value. When wisdom is rewarded, it gives value to the medium of exchange mere commerce cannot match. Insight and foresight have been dismissed too long and too recently for the Times to be pointing fingers. Pandering to militant ignorance may attract the imponderably deplorable, but the rabble cannot enlighten while dwelling in dogma and darkness. I say a word from the wise is sufficient and far more valuable than the ravings of petulant narcissists. About time self-interest was discounted in the interest of the universal values and inclusive provision President Obama alone, evidently, can bestow on this benighted country. His words are worth more than we know or can possibly afford, but precious few will listen, much less value the hard-won, trial-by-fire wrought counsel that has earned his remuneration. He's trying to help and the petty cash he gets will go to better causes than the illicit and illegal gains sought by the pretender-president.
Wall Street paid him as much for one speech as he was paid PER YEAR to be President. By most measures, that is a lot of money.<br/><br/>What did they expect to get for it? A few minutes of wisdom? <br/><br/>That money was to buy influence. Obama may not be President, but he is the leader of the Democrats and a huge influence over who will be the next President and what will be the politics pursued to get there. <br/><br/>Obama was corporate friendly in office. He pushed their chosen Hillary. They know what they want from him, and they have a track record of getting it.
Ever since he was elected and failed to address the class warfare and social/economic crimes of the financial industrial complex, Mr. Obama's relationship with Wall Street has been the source of enormous disappointment.<br/>Everything has both a price and a cost and in this case the price is not worth the cost to Mr. Obama.
I think we need to give the President Obama some time and his wife as well. No one knows what he plans on doing with that money at this point. He may funnel most of it into the foundation they have set up. There is no constitutional mandate that Presidents should give their time away for no charge and live like paupers in a housing project so they can please a certain constituency who believe he needs to be like every other working Joe or Jolene. He can never be that after eight years in the White House. The Carters have given much of their time and money to Habitat for Humanity, but they're not exactly paupers and living in federally subsidized housing. Give the man a break. If individuals and institutional entities are willing to pay him or anyone else that much money to give a speech, who are any of us to tell them they can't pay it and he can't accept it?
I'm thinking the Editorial Board is a bit over the top here. Is there an idea of what was actually said? For all we know Obama may have opened his comments with a plea for the audience to redistribute their wealth to Chicago's South Side population. Sure he accepted an 'honorarium',; he was, after all, a Professor of Constitutional Law and deserving of it. I have no problem with a former President speaking to interest groups, nor do I have a problem with them accepting money for such speeches. <br/><br/>The problem begins when former public figures very deliberately select their 'special interests' to be very different from the speaker's own public interests, then refuses to talk about what was said.  Tends to breed distrust, you know?
I guess one way to look at this is to say: "who am I to judge?" If anyone, including Wall Street or rich bankers, who else has the cash?, wanted to give me $400,000 for a speech I'd take the money and run away fast after having politely said thanks. So would most of your average people whom former President Obama is being said to be distancing himself from. Still the optics of his taking such a large of money from Wall Street don;t look right; even if he had chosen to donate the money to charity it still doesn;t look good to be taking cash from Wall Street and so I am left agreeing with critics like Senators Warren and Sanders. 
I agree with everyone coming to the defense of President Obama. I just wonder why the defense of Hillary Clinton on the same matter was not as robust, especially when such a defense could have spared us the present day nightmare.
Not just their cosiness with the wealthy, but their actions and policies have coincided with the wishes of the 1%ers. This dates back to Carter and is true up to the present with Obama.They have have consistently deregulated and thrown working people under the bus. They have all done their best to run from New Deal policies as fast as they could. 
How telling that Obama and Hillary Clinton are still and always held to a standard that demands they behave more ethically, morally, and, above all, selflessly than white male politicians!<br/><br/>We do not know how he will use that money or how many less wealthy venues that fee will allow Obama to address. But if those who can easily afford to pay that amount want to spend it to hear what he has to say, then he should not refuse the opportunity. The amount might even make such people value his words more highly.  After all, some people believe that the more you pay, the more it's worth.
I agree in theory, but why should the President Obama be the one to take the your or my high road at his own financial expense?  Why should he be the one to make a sacrifice and lose out on a financial opportunity any one of us would jump at given similar circumstances?  So WE can feel better?  So WE can feel holier than thou?  It's so much easier to ask others to make sacrifices we never have to make.  I don't think he is doing anything wrong.  More power to him.
When the average family has to work for many years to make a speaking fee, you start wondering if these people really do represent us. I voted for Obama twice and probably would again. That said, this type of activity is incredibly tone deaf, and is precisely one of the main reasons I supported Bernie over Hillary.<br/><br/>The money grab in our society by the top 1% has to end and the democrats should be at the vanguard of that effort.
President Obama may think he is not selling influence, but Wall Street companies paying a whopping $400,000 for one or two hours of speaking sure are seeking to buy it.  I'm disappointed that we have to be having this conversation with somebody who I've admired and always considered to be of the highest ethical standards.
There is nothing wrong with getting paid to perform a service. President Obama will get paid what the market will bear. I think humanity might well benefit in some small way by exposing Wall Street to this thoroughly decent, moral and thoughtful man.
Obama is out of the President game. That's not taxpayer money he's getting. He can earn whatever he can as long as it's legal. All former Presidents have gotten money for speeches. If that's a problem Congress can make a law to limit Presidents and Members of Congress from being paid for speeches and Lobbying after they leave office. Until that time nobody should have a complaint about any former President making money off speaking. That includes President Obama.<br/>I would worry more about the current President making money off the Office while still President.
Barak's payday(s) were long anticipated. He came in to office accepting an un-earned Peace Prize, and annulling any move to look back at the rogue Wall Street regime and political lackeys who brought the Nation to the brink of ruin.<br/>The consequent misery is still with us.<br/>Guantanamo? Still here.  Two eternal wars in Iraq and Afghanistan? Still here.<br/>Transparent process for reforming health care and making it affordable with choice of doctor?  Nada.<br/>Barak did more to extinguish transparency, punish whistle-blowers, and  enable corporate monopolies and international trade favorable to off-shore profits, slave and child labor, penny wages, and judicial cover for financial crimes than any other president.<br/>And let's thank him for the agony of Libya and his onlooker vacillation in Syria.
I do not begrudge President Obama is new life style that all of our former presidents since Reagan have indulged in.<br/><br/>I think that the disappointment we feel is because so many of us hunger for a real champion of the working class.  It certainly isn't Trump and, unfortunately, it is not Obama.  
Imagine how this would have played out the press release read "The former president was paid $400,000 for his speech and he directed that the proceeds be divide among the following charities......"<br/><br/>Really Mr. President?  This supporter is so disappointed
Obama once said in a speech--- Income inequality is the main issue of our age. Thus it’s tasteless for him to give high priced speeches, higher than even Hillary got, to the Wall St banks---who brought down the whole economy in 08. And nobody went to jail---they went into Obama’s cabinet! <br/><br/>These are big banks whose mega donations to our elections take away political influence from we the people. <br/><br/>That’s the standard of judgment to use here. 
This editorial makes too many negative assumptions.
I agree.  This piece said it beautifully.  Tone-deaf not immoral,  And a sign that the party doesn't get it -- the democrats have lost touch us.  And even after the catastrophe of November, they still don't hear it.  And yes, the Obamas are technically  private citizens, but the perception is that they are not -- they are the heads of a major political party that just lost.  
What influence? President Obama is now a private citizen - one who would only lobby our government as a whole, in a public forum. This editorial couldn't be more naive. The Obama haters of the world have bashed him with monstrous lies since he first hit the national stage. So, tell me again NYTimes editorial board, what difference does it make if he takes speaking fees now? This man, and his wife, will now endeavor to help mankind in ways no Republican president has ever ventured. They will spend their money, and money raised from other entities, to feed the poor, buy medicine for the most vulnerable, and make this world a better place. I hope he makes billions. Because I know what's in his heart and it's good. No matter how much he may be attacked by those with pretzel logic or hate in their hearts.
"Through his writing, Mr. Obama could shed important light on his decision making."  I have become to cynical to believe any politician will ever write the truth about themselves.  If I want good fiction I'll read Neal Stephenson or Thomas Mann.
President Obama is now a private citizen with as much right to engage in lawful commerce as any other American.  A paid speech is certainly lawful and quite frankly, should be a nonissue.  Why does the Times and all these other arm chair quarterbacks think they have the right to tell Mr. Obama how to earn a living?  <br/><br/>An earlier comment referenced the fact that Mr. Obama is African American and therefore subject to a higher standard (or less respect) depending on your point of view.  I agree whole heartedly with that point, but also remind the Times and others, that this moral pontificating is illustrative of the intellectual left thinking it knows best and lecturing everyone else on how to live their lives.  That is more of a reason as to why many parts of the Country rejected the Democrats, not because Barack Obama decided to give a speech and get paid for it.  <br/><br/>I urge the Times to focus its attention on the current administration and respective allies because that is where the news is these days!
This New York Times editorial today reads: "The tens of millions that Hillary Clinton raised from speaking to corporate interests most likely haunts her now — or should."<br/><br/>The New York Times Editorial Board noted in their February 26, 2016 editorial entitled "Mrs. Clinton, Show Voters Those Transcripts" that in her previous public response to this same call by Bernie Sanders and others, Hillary Clinton had “condition[ed] her releases on what the Republicans might or might not do.” The Editorial Board termed this response “mystifying.” And, then added by way of explanation: “Republicans make no bones about their commitment to Wall Street deregulation and tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans. Mrs. Clinton is laboring to convince struggling Americans that she will rein in big banks, despite taking their money.”<br/><br/>Interestingly enough, the Editorial Board of the New York Times never again asked Hillary Clinton to release the transcripts of her speeches. Now, the Editorial Board says: "The tens of millions that Hillary Clinton raised from speaking to corporate interests most likely haunts her now — or should." If Hillary had won the presidential election instead of only her victory over Bernie Sanders for the Democratic Party nomination, the Editorial Board of the New York Times would not have said another word about this fault.
An amazing collection of rationalizations.  It would be fun to know the age of the commentators - I bet most are over 30. The whopping fee will only confirm the cynicism of younger voters  that the "system" is corrupt and there is little difference between the parties.  
"a president keenly attuned to the worries and resentments of the 99 percent"? How so? With typical excuse-making, everything Obama did is covered with worshipful praise as ground-breaking and visionary. The sad part is, the NYT editors probably think this piece is critical of Obama, and that they were being hard on him. If that is so--that is, if this column really is hard on Obama--I don't want to see a column when they decide to praise him.
Obama is free to speak to whomever he likes, for whatever price the market will bear. The fact remains that people like me and millions others will have less respect for him, and even greater cynicism about how our interests fit within the Democratic Party. Franklin Roosevelt once said of the elite business class, "They are unanimous in their hate for me—and I welcome their hatred." Roosevelt built a generation of broad-based prosperity under Democratic leadership. Obama left us with Trump over Clinton. So yeah, this stuff hurts.
Does anybody know when he is going to release the video or text of his speech?
I can't get over these incredibly hypocritical comments praising Obama for accepting a whopping $400,000 for an upcoming speech before the  Wall Street investment managers and hedge fund managers.  Yet, these very same so-called progressives excoriated Hillary Clinton for doing exactly the same thing after she announced presidential bid.  I remember the shrill demands from Bernie Sanders and his over-zealous followers who  acted so self-righteous and sanctimonious as they demanded transcripts of her  Goldman-Sachs speeches. The progressives were having the vapors at the huge fees Clinton accepted for talking to Goldman Sachs.. Hillary Clinton was also a private citizen when she made her speeches so there would be no conflict of interest charges.  Yet there isn't a peep out of Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren as Barack Obama becomes just another ex-president turned corporate sell-out.   Once again Barack Obama gets another free pass.
Perhaps the Times can share with us what the right amount should be in terms of how much Mr. Obama should receive as a retired president?  Should all his speeches be for free because of the book deal?  Is their some ceiling he should not pass?  Remember, Ronald Reagan accepted a 2 million dollar payment for a couple of speeches in Japan.  Did the Times question that at the time?  Again, I don't think Mr. Obama should be expected to hold up the entire set of expectations for the office of the presidency while the Times and other news organizations seem perfectly fine with the corrupt resident of the office.  What?  No speculation about Trump's grift amounts and no call for his resignation in light of his clear violations of the emoluments clause? Huh?  No call for aggressive investigation by the Congress?  Well, no.  Its ok when Trump does it, right?  I am disgusted with the Times on this and many other issues...
In an era of purchased influence, why can’t former President Obama set a higher standard?<br/>Because he is what he is...a typical double talking politician. He was ineffective for 8 years in the White House. Now people are willing to pay him a fortune to lie about it and pontificate on more subjects for which he is unqualified. Wonder how he feels about Trump's tax plan.
....but why is it bad?<br/><br/>This editorial repeatedly laments that Obama getting paid a lot to do a speech is lamentable and regrettable and sad, but it never says why.<br/><br/>I'm starting to suspect that there IS no reason why.
What is wrong with you New York Times?<br/><br/>First of all, you hire a climate denier and equate lack of facts with debate.<br/><br/>Now, you're holding your nose in the air, sniffing loudly, as you proclaim your disappointment with Obama for soiling his hands with money. Completely forgetting that this is a man who is no longer in public office, and who doesn't owe you a thing. <br/><br/>You need to get your priorities in order. 
I spent way to much time reading three or four articles in the Sunday New York Times that I subscribe too during the election to tolerate such a cheap editorial from the Times.  You put aside decency and helped elect Trump for the money.  Shame on you.
...and while we are at it Barack, why don't you have your "foundation" give a little something to my "foundation" (NYT) for eight years of unrelentingly positive press coverage. I am due.<br/>The IRS clearly needs to start regulating "foundations".
This sentiment is what is wrong with Democrats; handwringing over wealth. If Wall Street is willing to pay President Obama, he should take the money and run. President Obama will be that much more effective if he combines the power of his wealth with the power of his speeches. He can put his money where his mounth is!
Mr Obama, donate your speech monies to charity.  
The ombudsmanship of NYT is appreciable. It should be heedsed by the concerned!!<br/>Hillary took 625000? for 3 speeches which was lamentable and bemoaning at that post! One could imagine what she would have done after presidency!<br/>Hope wisdom prevails and BO will contribute a major part  towards something constructive  ...
How noble of the NY Times to suggest how Mr. Obama decide to spend his post-presidential time and earn a living after devoting his adult life to public service.  Why not lead by example and convert the NY Times to a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization instead of the profits going to the Ochs-Sulzberger family?
I am certain the RNC and the White House are smiling today after reading this opinion piece, I expected more from the NY Times. What hypocrisy, again not from Obama but from the Editorial Board. Obama is lauded and chided at the same time by this "hit piece". You should have included a disclaimer with this tripe! 
I am astonished that there is such public outcry about Obama's speaking fee.  He is barely out of office and fresh off a vacation; none of us knows with any specificity what he plans to do with his time and money.  For all we know, he *may* be donating it.  But a more important question is this:  Do we expect more of him because he is black?  Is he supposed to forego a speaking fee because he represents underserved populations?  Does his race require that he assume this burden?  If so, the issue is simply identity politics wrapped up a new package...and the sanctimony rankles.
Oh, PLEASE.  Now the NYT is the Daily Worker?<br/><br/>I don't care if Barack Obama gets paid to speak, and I don't care how much.  I also didn't care what Clinton got.  <br/><br/>Why is it the Times has waited until a woman and an African American has reached this level of earning potential to put its nose in the air?
Most NYT commentators got played by Obama for a vote and now will get played to help the publisher recoup Obama's $65mil. <br/><br/>How can they complain about a $0.4 mil coming from Wall Street when they're already planning,salivating ala Pavlov's dogs to contribute their fair share? 
Obama is a living embodiment of American ambiguity.  Neither black nor white, neither conservative nor liberal, neither good nor evil, he embodies opportunism in its purest form.  Why blame him for taking the capitalist road and making lots of money?  He doesn't stand for anything else, since as our president he failed signally to address the ongoing black-on-black homicide epidemic here in Chicago.
If he'd agreed to talk to these people for nothing, he'd be called a chump. 
Only the liberal left is surprised. The rest of us aren't.<br/><br/>Throughout the West, it becomes less and less meaningful except in symbolic terms who is elected: the reach of global corporate wealth and power has reached such mammoth proportions, that electoral squabbling is beginning to look suspiciously like distraction meant to deflect the populaces' views in the wrong direction.<br/><br/>I'm beginning to understand why people in France, and in Kentucky, and in Sweden, and a few other places, are tempted by the far right. They're still falling for a sucker punch, but I am beginning to understand it. All these governments, including the EU, are bought and paid for.<br/><br/>Never in human history have so few controlled so much wealth and so much power over the direction of humanity. Most of these leadership positions inevitably end in a "If you can't beat 'em, join 'em" scenario.<br/><br/>The commons have lost everything: air, water, broadcast waves, the seas . . .<br/><br/>Obama is just the latest in what Edith Wharton called one of her characters in "The Age of Innocence": "The last and most plaintive in a line of ghosts."
Nobody is a bigger fan of President Obama than me. And neither this incident nor anything I foresee he could ever do would change that.<br/><br/>But come on guys, let’s be honest—this is disappointing. Our fellow Obama tribesmen are scurrying about, attacking the Times and making ever sort of excuse for him. Even things like, “What Trump has done is much worse.” Have we sunk so low that that’s the new standard?<br/><br/>What bugs me here is the missed opportunity. President Obama has more money than he ever can spend, and decades of time with nothing to do. It would have been so cool if he had said something like this:<br/><br/>“Something I like to do is to go out and make speeches. So if you would like me to talk to your group let me know. I’ll only be able to fulfill a fraction of these requests. But if I can do it I won’t charge you a fee, and I’ll get there at my own expense.”<br/><br/>So how cool would that be? He can still talk to the Wall Streeters—and tell them exactly what they need to hear. And if there’s a new Boys and Girls Club opening up in a tough part of town somewhere and they need just the right speaker, go ahead and ask—you might get a surprise, and if you do you won’t need to sweat the fee.<br/><br/>Hey wait a minute—why is this opportunity missed? Just as President Trump is only 100 days into his presidency, President Obama is only 100 days into his new life. Give the guy a break, he’s still figuring this out. He’ll get this right, and then some. I’m very hopeful.
He  took good care of Wall St  while in office and now he is cashing in. 
Let me understand progressives; Barack Obama at great cost to his personal dignity was vilified by GOP as president for championing:<br/><br/>Affordable Care Act<br/>Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act<br/>Reduced military foot print in two war zones<br/>Protected all those autoworkers with federal subsidies from TARP<br/>Equal Pay Protection<br/>Civil and Voters Rights<br/>Overtime Protection<br/>Gay and Lesbian Rights (eventually)<br/>Transgender Rights<br/>Maternity Rights<br/>Access to Contraceptives through workplace insurance<br/>Unprecedented expansion and protections of public lands<br/>More National Landmarks for one administration in decades<br/><br/>BUT after all and more plus 8 years of distinguished blemish free, scandal free service to this country as the nations first black president, his bona fides are in doubt over a paid speech?<br/><br/>Meanwhile I am stressing over the thought the butcher of Manila may be having a state dinner at 1600 Pennsylvania or the crazy nut from North Korea is a misunderstood "smart cookie" considering the unfortunate set of circumstances his daddy left him in!!!
So where is the cutoff Editors of the Times? Would you write this editorial if the fee was $200,000? How about $100,000? How about your own pay? How much do you get paid for your opinions? Is that too much also?<br/><br/>Where are the editorials about the pay of hedge fund managers or CEO's of the giant corporations? Where is the editorial on the hundreds of thousands we pay our elected officials where we pay for protection, staff, offices along with salary?<br/><br/>No, this is a stupid editorial that was not thought through whatsoever. 
They are all the same. They all for their own selfish interest once they rub elbows with the elite rich who give them their power , wink at the rape of Gaia . FRAUDS!<br/><br/>Products of the capitalist system marches in one direction , free to rape and murder and slaughter millions of animals on our roads a bump on the road to evil greed,murder the spirit and torment the souls of billions of people and it only gets worse .<br/>The future Evil capitalism is capable of there comes a time anyone that continues to be seduced knowing where this brings us must be marked as a traitor to Gaia<br/>Capitalism had it's place but now as machines take the place of humans  a new religion must come to the earth with the rejection of this seduction that brings temporary pleasures the elite and their plan to lift people out of poverty just creates more self greed and the best they can do is Obama which is even a bigger betrayal of Gaia based on the this seduction and deception and false hope given to the people about our rotting present way of life that is in need of radial changes
Are you telling us that Obama was a phony? Attacking the rich to be elected because it is fashionable but in love with them secretly.
Never saw this kind of critique for al the previous  white presidents!
Pathetic for all of us... the public and the audience.
Proofread the last sentence.  Either you hope he'll set a higher standard THAN PAST presidents or you hope he'll set a higher standard FOR FUTURE presidents, right?
I love how literally everyone in the country conventional wisdom crowd wants the black guy to be the one to pass on lucrative speaking gigs after leaving office....after having discounted the issue considerably for everyone else.<br/><br/>Your ability to take a stance on this is greatly diminished by your past shoulder shrugs.
My thoughts for the Obamas - good for you!
It is not such a coincidence that the god of the Progressives, as we close out the Easter season, that like Judas Iscariat sold his soul for 30 pieces of silver. His adoring lemmings have been fooled from the get go as they watch his "legacy" destroyed brick by brick. Future historians will not be kind to this phony.
Only a Black man would be expected to turn down speaking fees from Wall Street in the name of some higher calling. Let's call this what it is--RACISM--and get on with our lives.
Obama tried for more than 8 years to take the high road and they still try to bring him down.  I'm totally supportive of his taking the money and any other US corp who offers money to hear him speak.  Remember that Reagan went to Japan and was paid lots to speak (can't remember how much, but it was a lot).  He may even be able to say something that will make Wall Street change their wicked way. 
Say it isn't so, Barry!
After the slings and arrows the Obamas (especially the Prez) endured for 8 years, he's still expected to set an example? Leave them alone, for pity's sake.<br/><br/>Given the craven, money-grubbing occupant of the oval now, the hypocrisy is quite stunning. 
Pres Obama served this country for 8 years and tried very hard to help his fellow Americans. So now you, the NYT decides that he has no right to go out into the so called free market and earn money like the other previous presidents. Where were you when they earned money Are you now changing the bar because the Black President dares to do what the other White Presidents have done since I became a voter in the 1960S? I say earn the money Mr President because evidently no one cares that the current President and his family are fleecing America  and it seems to be okay. NYT how condescending of you toward Pres Obama and the righteous comments from the so called left and right. I have been around long enough to hear a subtle dog whistle when it is said or written.
It was OK for all the white guys to get compensated after their Presidency but not the black one?  He is one of the greatest orators of our time, and he deserves to be compensated as such.  The Democrats have a lot of problems but Obama getting paid for speeches is the least of them.
Who are you people to even have the audacity to write this nonsense? Why not try holding our current leaders to your moral high standard.  Good Lord, this is unreal.  Obama is a private citizen.  Point your moral outrage where it can do some work, toward 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.  I'm sure you will find enough violations to fill your need for outrage.  Honestly, NYT. Wake up. 
Former President Obama is as much a disappointment out-of-office as he was in-office. His first 100 days in office proved that his inflated rhetoric really was just so much hot hair. His first act after being sworn-in was to make a stirring speech while signing an executive order closing GITMO. Except it stayed open. And open. And open. And open. Never did close. Unlike Trump, he did manage to fill all the top leadership posts fairly quickly, but then Obama pretty much just hired-up from the employees of CitiGroup. <br/><br/>Not sure why the mandarins at the NYT are so shocked that President Obama isn't walking the talk. That's been his M.O. for the last eight years.
Only in Trump's America! It seems to me that the NYT Editorial Board is simply making an effort to do a little democrat/Obama bashing to take the heat off their not aggressive enough reporting on the disaster that is the Trump administration! It pairs well with NYT hiring a climate science denier columnist. The wealthy and the market must be applying real heat to the NYT.<br/><br/>Obama is one of the good guys! Why is this a thing? Isn't this the America where we all strive to increase our wealth? Why are you knocking the first black president for doing that. Smacks of institutionalized racism to me. Clean it up NYT. Clean it up!
Yes, and how dare U2, Sting, Katy Perry, and Madonna accept millions for just singing a few silly little songs.   This is a vile pillory of a private citizen for absolutely no good reason whatsoever.  This is the same New York times that hired a climate change denier as a columnist and it thinks it can talk about public good.  Ha.
The Obamas are phonies - why can't Democrats figure that out?
Wonderful.  It took the NY Times until Obama leaves office to realize that he is a liar and a hypocrite.<br/><br/>Too bad they didn't realize that 8-years ago, we could have avoided the horror show that was the Obama Presidency.
Well, well... Isn't this the kettle calling the pot black! NY Times you should be ashamed of yourselves coming down on Barack Obama in this way. Eight grueling years this president had to endure, and he did so with great dignity! Leave him alone! He deserves every penny of those speaking fees!
I am probably still a fan of Obama.  But this speaking gig has really lowered my opinion of the Obama's.
NY "Trump has a 9% chance" Times readers will find a way to dismiss this. Unbiased observers just see it as more bad judgement from Obama. Mr. Hope and Change didnt even do the one thing even his haters expected - improve racial harmony and improve inner cities. 
AMEN!
Why now? Years of presidents before him have done this. The least you could have done is compare the dollar values over the years. Why now and why him? I am sickened by what is going through my mind.... NYT's you should be better than this... we have an maniac in the white house and you write this for an editorial? How about the twitter's real estate holdings in the Philippines 
Our current President and his family are openly profiting off the presidency, and we're talking about a speaking fee? Steve Mnuchin is our Treasury Secretary and we're concerned about President Obama's ties to Wall Street? Give me a break.
Obama is and always will be nothing but an opportunistic politician. It has always been all about Obama all the time.  NYT, Getta Grip!
Billionaires have run politics since Roman times, so nothing should surprise here. We had our candidate in Sanders, but brainwashed liberals and bigoted minorities refused to vote in a liberal Jew because he was old and white. You make your bed you lie it, so please spare me the moralizing over an Ivy grad who is half-black and did very little that could be accurately labeled progressive while he had the power. This article is just Country Club Liberals feeling bad for themselves that the Obama brand has slightly less luster.
I'm sorry to say this, but the only real change that Obama brought to the Oval Office was that he's black.
I'd rather have a president "cash-out" after leaving office, than having one who uses the White House to enrich himself while in office!!!
This phony can never do anything wrong in the eyes of you liberals and your media.  Thank God, yes God, that he is out of office.
Obama was very very good to Wall Street and now Wall Street will be very very good to him.
"Thank you for your submission. Your comment will appear once it has been approved."<br/><br/>Right. I'll hold my breath. 
Please!  Give the guy a break.  Lots of people get paid for speeches, why shouldn't he!
Obama spent eight years bashing the rich while vacationing, partying and golfing with them.  And the media just didn't seem to care.
Why is this even an issue? He's entitled to make money. He's out of office. What fee has the Times decided that it's okay for him to accept? Or have the editors decided that he can only be morally pure if he takes a vow of poverty and works for free for the rest of his life?<br/><br/>And by the way, we have a current President who's decided that it's okay to invite a mass murderer to the White House, and who has white supremacists and Nazis working in the West Wing. If the Times treated the fact that there are Nazis and white supremacists in the White House the way they treated Hillary's emails, maybe we'd be closer to dealing with our actual problem: an authoritarian kleptocrat who's cozy with white supremacists and Nazis is the most powerful person in the world. This is the emergency - not the fact that a private citizen is earning a fee for a speech. 
This column is exactly the confirmation I needed to cancel my long standing subscription to this paper. Do the editors not see how tone deaf they look criticizing the first black President for this after he has completed his stint in  office. Do you realize how paternalistic you sound? Trevor Noah hit it on the proverbial head.  
An Editorial that was not worth writing and which serves no good purpose.
Could it be that Barak Obama isn't entirely the Barak Obama of the Times' editorial writers' imaginations?
Oh, Gray Lady! Continue to fool yourself, believing anyone entrenched in the Democratic Party Machine cares to even pretend anymore to have the ability and want to put it to use to set the path right. Ours is an oligarchy and we will NEVER see another world so long as we keep having the same performers playing the roles in this puppet show.
I don't get the Times. With all that's going on FORMER President Obama is making a speech and getting paid to do so. He did not set up a "resort" where people have to pay $200k to step foot in the door. He did not set his family up to grift from the WH. He did not display ignorance of governance (the Constitution is bad for the country) and he has not been accused of sexual assault. <br/><br/>Long story short he didn't grift while in the WH. He's as entitled as any former President to be paid for his words. <br/><br/>If only you'd cared so much about all the info that was out about 45 before the election instead of unimportant emails. 
This is just another of example of NYT editors using any opportunity to criticize Obama! And the thesis is just plain ignorant! If you really expect The P or other successors to follow any of the Obamas' good examples, you need some serious help!
Oh my, let's hope the Times' ed staff isn't pilloried like the Times' newby Bret Stephens' first on-staff post for this dangerous assault on the land of the left.
Trump will use this criticism of Obama sprung like a single sickly tulip from the collective brainpower of the NYT Editorial Board - he will misquote, pervert, and use it even in its pure unadulterated form to try and establish a moral equivalence between himself and his predecessor. So then, it's a good Monday morning for Trump who obviously needed something in the form of a bon bon from the Times (not counting what Peter Baker's already provided over the weekend) kicking off his second hundred days.
Donald Trump and the multi-million dollar salaried NYT leadership apparently agree on one thing--everything is Barack Obama's fault.  
It seemss to me that anytime a person of Barack Obama's stature, grace, wisdom and integrity can take money out of corporate coffers and turn it into good work we should be grateful.<br/>He will be remembered as one of the top 5 leaders this country has ever had. Too bad that we are stuck with the Orange Buffoon who is determined to undo all the good work the Obamas accomplished while lining his own pockets with gold.
I can't believe people are reacting to this the way they are. And that so many of them are "free-market" Republicans. President Obama didn't put a gun to anyone's head...
How care the black guy or the female make money on speeches!<br/><br/>Please.
NYT still can't figure out Obama never was about hope or change for anyone but himself. There is something seriously wrong with YOU people.
If President Obama's speaking fee had been $4000, there would be a snarking chorus about how little his insights and his experience must be worth.
This very decent man has always tended to disappoint, but never fully. Now he is out of office...and he still disappoints, but not fully.<br/>When my 4 year old granddaughter does something wrong...she argues she is only human. This disarms us, but we set her straight anyway.<br/>Mr. Obama is now part of a different class, the ruling class and he might argue like my very bright granddaughter that he is only human.<br/>But what does he really teach about American leadership? The middle class and the poor will just have to swallow it. -Rudy 
If you want to target a black man, how about Clarence Thomas?
with all due respect I am surprised that After all he has accomplished and you still want to pay a black man Pennies on the dollar.
Why is it the black man who should give away his talents for less or, better yet, for free?
Who wrote this editorial? Bernie?
Sure, the black guy shouldn't be able to make whatever money he can. Next thing you know he'll want to vote in Chicago's elections. 
Workaday vulgarity of the current administration, could you possibly be more biased. Its makes the entire article ridiculous.  
Matters not how much he gets paid.  Matters more what he says when he talks to those who nearly took the global economy down with their greed.  
Sure after excoriating politicians for cozying up to Wall Street, Obama does the exact same thing. His greed for money is so apparent after all, why not follow in the Clintons footsteps of greed.
Mr. Obama will make more money out of office compared to when he was in office. Speaking fees are just the tip of the iceberg. Kind of hypocritical considering that he would be apoplectic when republican politicians were filling their coffers with donations from the elites. 
Obama's speech is a non-story.  $530k paid by a foreign government to the US National Security Advisor--that's a story.   
Perhaps the NYT Editorial Board should reserve judgment until they see exactly how Obama spend his speaking fees. If their is something to criticize at the time then so be it. 
The Editorial Board would do well to rail against the belligerent, crass and craven corruption of the current administration, as opposed to imposing a new set of ethical restraints on the ability of our first African-American Ex-President to make money. Mr. Obama has contributed more than his share of time and effort to public service in a life with no comparison to recent Presidents. Give the man a break!
I'm deeply disturbed  by how many posters, presumably liberals, are defending President Obama's indefensible choice.  If he cared--at all--about the future of the Democratic party, or small-d democracy, he would avoid Wall Street fees like  the political kryptonite--and moral calamity-- it is.  This is the LAST thing progressives and liberals need their most public figure doing. With Obama's huge book deals, he certainly doesn't need the cash.  It's time for we on the left to acknowledge that Pres. Obama's weakness, arrogance, and multiple failures of judgement, particularly in regards to the working and middle class, are partially responsible for the nightmare of Donald Trump.
You on the editorial board ... do you work for free?  Like Thomas Sowell, I believe Barry was not only incompetent but indeed the worst President in US history.  But seriously, is there no end to the NYT ivory-tower naivete?  On what basis would any person reasonably begrudge him from engaging in a legal and ethical arms-length transaction involving exchange of value between him and organizations that want to hire him?  Unlike the corrupt Clinton Foundation pay-for-influence scheme, this in no way involves gaining access to a public official.  Why would it ever be proper to suggest that he subsidize his host organizations by giving his services for free, or suggest that he give his earnings to some charity because you think he should? 
I get the feeling that the Times editorial board wants to canonize Obama and remove any apparent blemish to preserve his purity. I have a deep respect for the man and do not feel that his stature will be diminished by accepting fat fees for speaking engagements. Yes, it is disappointing that he does not have the piety of a Buddhist monk, but that does not rule him out as a paragon of morality and decency for American society.
The damage from Trump gets worse. Everybody looks great compared to our president, who doesn't even understand democracy, the constitution, and citizens rights. Everything is a deal, to bring Trump attention, profit, and authority.<br/> Thus, he turns out to be a gift to the Dems. And to the columnists who look so liberal just writing anti Trump stuff constantly. A piece of cake. This is what our worst pres ever has accomplished---and it's just the start.<br/><br/>Our standards are being lowered more and more every day. What’s ethical, or what's undue influence of the elites in a democracy? The Dems look good vs Trump---no matter what. 
As far as I'm concerned, he can make as much as he wants. They all do, the system is corrupt, and he'll use it to have as much influence as possible. He's young, and unfortunately he'll be around a long time to rake it in, wield his influence and live in a biblical level of wealth. He might 'only' be a millionaire, but he'll run with the billionaires and have the same lifestyle, and actually more influence than they.<br/><br/>Whatever he deposits in the bank, it's worth every penny to get him out of the White House. Thank god he's gone. Easily the worst president in my lifetime: a do nothing smooth talker and a feckless socialist ideologue who actually doesn't like the USA very much.  <br/><br/>Good riddance to him and thank goodness the completely corrupt sociopath who was spawned to replace him suffered an agonizing and humiliating defeat.<br/>Alas, the destruction of the country I love has only been delayed by a decade or so. The people now have the awareness and unrelenting greed to continue to vote themselves money from the public treasury and ruination is only several decades away...
Does the NYTimes plan to provide financial support to the Obama family? Everyone has bills and adults work for a living. This is not illegal, so unless you have a plan to financially support their household, this is none of your business. 
I am sure that the Obamas will not just hog the largesse. They enjoy "the good life," as do most folks who have access to it.  But they not the hogging type!  Some Obama income that does not go to the Foundation most likely will be a part of personal discretionary spending that helps people and advances causes in various ways. 
Now that he has accepted the deal, maybe we can hope that he will tell his audience some things they need to hear and that he will share the speech with the public at some point.  
Three words...Pro Sport Athlete
He's on our team so we don't care about influence peddling!
I admit that I have not read the entire editorial.  I read enough.  To criticize Mr. Obama for making a large sum for a speaking engagement is within your perogative as a newspaper.  Your position on this matter in this current polical climate, is ludicrous.  I do not begrudge him making as much as he can.  No one is forcing those wealthy people to pay a former president for his time or thoughts.  Mr. Obama might even use some of that money to do some more good for others as a private citizen, or not.  The money may also allow him to make more speeches where he is NOT PAID ANYTHING. Did you consider that possibility?  This is not ill-gotten goods.  If you want to rail against money, use more ink on the Citizens United effect on our lives. By the way, is this the same Board that thought Mrs. Clinton was 98% likely to win the election?  If so, the owners of the Times should buy a smarter Editorial Board. So there.
I don't get this hand-wringing over large speaking fees. A President takes on extraordinary burdens and basically gives up his life and health -- ever notice the before and after on a President's face? -- while being grossly underpaid. So after all the heavy lifting for the American people, why shouldn't a President cash in? It's far preferable to a President and his family cashing in while while he's still in office.      
It is good to report this as factual information. It is another matter to wring your hands and cast aspersions on Obama over it. Let's wait and see what Obama DOES with the money. If he spends it on gold faucets ala Trump, then he deserves condemnation. If he starts an effective foundation ala Clintons, then he deserves praise -- though like the Clintons, the Obamas will be excoriated by the right wing fake news outlets.
He served this country well. He put up with being blocked at every turn. He has two daughters about to go to college. He deserves every bit of the money he gets from speeches, and public appearances. Stop trying to make this an issue about character or supposed "tone deafness", and say what you really mean. Anyone who thinks he shouldn't be paid the same, if not more for his speeches has a problem with race, and has decided he should be humble, and quiet. Setting a higher standard, means you put him on equal ground with the greatest leaders of all time, and if they get top dollar, so should he.
I'd sure take it if someone offered me 400K for a speech. Maybe a billionaire can afford turn that down but if Cantor Fitzgerald was on the line with that offer would you really turn them down?
The best comment in this section:<br/>HANK Newark, DE<br/>"I look at it as just compensation for the horrendous disrespect and abuse opposition politicians and citizenry heaped on him for 8 years."<br/><br/>Because of what those evil republicans did to me - I now take these $800,000.
In an era of demagoguery, fear-mongering and profiteering by the current occupant of the White House (and members of his family), why can’t<br/>The New York Times Editorial Board set a higher standard?
Thank you!
Twin books? Twin books? I, for one, can't wait to read both. Because I hold both in high esteem and respect, and because with our present "President", I miss them both so much!!!
" they reflected, almost uniformly, the perspectives of their class: the top 1 percent or so of the income scale"<br/>Like it or not that is where Obama belongs. Strictly from an economic point of view, which is what the category denotes.<br/>It serves no purpose for him to reject the money he so richly deserves.<br/>The best he can do is to contribute grandly to charitable and political causes.<br/>Obama is not a political factor anymore, at least no more than any former president.<br/>He can give a few speeches, and help a little, but will not change the overall picture. We have abundant evidence of that fact from this past election.<br/>It is completely absurd from the NYT to suggest that Democrats should exhibit a higher moral standard and unilaterally disarm, so as not to be able to contribute as much as possible to their favorite causes.
Obama should donate all earnings from such speeches to a fund for preventing violence against children especially in Chicago.
Would anyone even be asking these questions if the former president was white?
Everybody has a price.  See?  Obama isn't so great and he shows it.
Yes, thank you.
Mr. Obama has always prioritized the greater good ahead of immediate personal public approval. Given that, why not wait to see what goals he puts that Wall Street "silver" towards before condemning him for accepting it.
We including the NY Times who have admired Barack Obama for the last decade should do what is so often proclaimed by ethical sleuths and muckrakers - follow the money and do so as it accumulates in Obama's coffers.
Reparations.  $400K is a drop in the bucket compared to what Obama and all black citizens of this country are due.<br/>As much as the NYT would like, you can't remove the racial lens from this issue.
Apparently the NYT has bought into the meme IIOKIYAAR. (It is OK if you are a republican).<br/>First, as a number of comments have pointed out, we have a man in the White House who says that there are no conflicts of interest for the President, because he said so. He continues to run (ok, just dabble in) business that are benefiting directly from his actions.  He flaunts nepotism standards, he violates norms of decency, and barely can utter words more than "fake news", "biggest ever", and "believe me".<br/>And you want to scold Mr. Obama.  Please. 
The proof of the pudding is in the eating.  He is a politician, nothing else.
In America, nobody should ever tell anybody else how much money they're allowed to make. Period.
Obama's paltry government pensions won't even cover the rent on the new digs, and paying the bills on Obama, Inc. is going to be costly, so the Obamas are going to have to dig and claw to support their lifestyle. What? You think renting Brando Island is cheap? Tuition at Harvard for the girls? First class airfare? Living political donation to political donation is stressful. Cut them some slack.<br/><br/>The Obamas aspired to the One Percent. Now they are there. Get used to it, Times Editors.
For those who don't see what the big deal is, it comes down to this: "I do think at a certain point you’ve made enough money."<br/><br/>(2) $400,000 speeches, and a $60,000,000 book deal.  It's a classic moment of Do As I Say, Not As I Do.<br/><br/>We little people call it "hypocrisy". 
Did Bernie Sanders write this?
Did someone mention earlier " the scandal free 8 years of the Obama administration" ?<br/>Did he forget Fast and Furious or Lois Lerner and the IRS; how about Benghazi or going after reporters who dare to go after him.<br/>Let's not forget Hillary using the State Dept to get Bill some spending money from foreign governments. Or that darn email mess.<br/>How about " you can keep you medical plan and keep your doctor any I'll make sure your premiums will drop $2500."<br/>Lying about the Iran ransom payments.<br/>Come on guy get real and be honest.
"...every former president but Jimmy Carter has supped often at the corporate table." When a former POTUS actually does act on his moral principles and refuses money, the editorial board of the New York Times Corporation dismisses him as an irrelevant footnote to history. What hypocrisy!
Typical NY times bias<br/>Why not mentioning 41 and 43 presidents.As far i know leaving in Texas<br/>they have retired and stayed out of public life.Ronald Reagan did the same.
Why is it that Mr. Obama should be the only ex-president to refuse to be paid for speeches? OR, Why is it OK for everyone else to accept money for speeches?  How will be pay for his presidential library (a seeming necessity after a presidency) if he declines remuneration? Oh...he can afford it?  This is a ridiculous double standard.  If someone doesn't like an ex-president (or VP or Sec of State or any other position) to get paid for a speech, the change the law to mandate it. Oh...no one is paying attention to the law any more....they just make hay while the ARE president.  Put the outrage where it is deserved.
Wait until BHO is on the campaign trail giving a Bernie Sander's speech-the irony will be rich.
Perhaps The Times can follow its own advice by eliminating all ads from the online version of the paper.
I'm disappointed that the New York Times is pushing the same drivel that Fox News has been pushing.<br/><br/>Has the Times forgotten about what the media's extensive coverage of Hillary's emails gave us?
BHO is a private citizen now and nobody knows if this fee is going to his charitable organization or not. It disturbs me that America continues to hold the first black POTUS to the highest standard possible while essentially giving everyone else a pass. Why? It's not his job to fix America.
Jeez leave the guy alone.  He gave the best years of his life to his nation.  If rubes wanna pay him four hundred g's to hear him talk, let them pay!  It's not like he's going to be influencing policy on their behalf.  This is WAY overblown and Obama has done nothing wrong.
If Obama was true to his 'supposed ideals', he could set up a charitable foundation for inner-city African Americans kids and donate all the money from his speeches to a worthy cause.<br/><br/>Don't hold your breath, folks. Barry and Michelle went Hollywood a long time ago.
THIS is what you waste your time and space on? You seem determined to drive subscribers away. I'm hanging on, but you're making it very, very, very hard. The White House is a shimmering, greasy, slimy gumbo of corruption and greed, led by a sleazy family that is using the presidency to shovel cash into its pockets and purses as fast as they can, and you want to shame Mr. Obama for working for a living. <br/><br/>Here's a thought: why don't you, the editors, give your undoubtedly very robust salaries and equities to a worthy foundation? Work for free, why don't you? You want the former President to do it, so why don't you try it? <br/><br/>Another thought: Democrats like me know perfectly well that Trump's voters made their choice from race hatred and religious bigotry. Stop with the 'Oh, Democrats can't connect with the working classes' garbage. Democrats didn't pitch their message to the racists among the working classes. That's different.
The fact that ex-Community Organizer-In-Chief BHO was paid $400,000 (his annual salary as President) to read someone else's words on a TelePrompTer for an hour isn't the problem. The real problem is that there are (a.) people willing to pay him to do it, (b.) people who care what words he recites, and (c.) people who think he did a good job as President. What alternate reality do those people live in? And how can we destroy it, or at least make it inaccessible, so that those people can't do damage to the rest of us in the real world? That's the REAL problem. 
What we have here is an illustration of Democratic hypocrisy at the highest level.  I am really disappointed.
President Obama is not being paid enough.<br/>It's what he will do with his money that is important.<br/>I suspect he will live in a NY penthouse with gilded furniture.<br/>We need his leadership and his foundation needs our financial support.
I am almost as dismayed to read the overwhelming support for President Obama's decision to accept the paid invitation to speak to Goldman Sachs as I was when I read that he was being paid $400,000 for the speech.  Yes, he has every right to do so. No one can dictate how much one earns (except my employer). Yes, other presidents since Ford have done so, almost routinely, except for Jimmy Carter.  But I had hoped that President Obama would turn the corner on this practice and become the hero of millions of Americans by his steadfast refusal to pander to the 1% while continuing to fight for the 99%.  <br/><br/>Of the US presidents of my lifetime, the two I admire most are Harry Truman and Jimmy Carter. As the Times pointed out a few days ago, even though Truman's net worth was lower than any president before or since, and while he had several offers to speak or become a member of a corporate board, his response was, “I could never lend myself to any transaction, however respectable, that would commercialize on the prestige and dignity of the office of the presidency.” Carter, while universally dismissed as an ineffective president, has for the past 37 years shown how to alleviate suffering and injustice while shunning the urge to cash in. Their moral capital far exceeds their financial worth.<br/><br/>Perhaps this is naive, but I have to think that a young, ex-president with a generous pension can continue to live comfortably if not lavishly, while still doing good for the world. Yes, he can!
There is a symbolism for a politician to making a speech to Wall Street firms, that has been leveraged by the opposition. These actions evoke confirmation bias in those that do not want Obama, Clinton, etc. to be in positions of power, that they are insensitive to the plight of ordinary Americans. So, where is the counter argument? Why does President Trump get a free pass on sensitivity?
If anyone wants to pay a private citizen 400 grand to talk to them, I say more power to them. I can't even get anyone to pay me 400 bucks. When will people realize that banks and MANY other types of organizations are willing to pay the price because of the prestige it brings to the organization, not because the speaker is delivering some sort of coded message about how to beat the markets. 
Why all the newspapers wrote about Obama's fee? Wall street want to hear the former president speaks and why not? Obama will donate some of his income and I am sure it is a lot more more than Trump has ever donate in his life. Even without the donation, flow of money from those how have too much is good for the economy. 
Seems pretty rich that the NY Times, and the media in general, who bent over backwards to create a false equivalency between the two Presidential Candidates, where none even remotely existed, largely to drive up ratings and readership (ie business), now have the audacity to criticize the former president for being paid the market rate for people of his caliber and notoriety. <br/><br/>It is also highly likely the President Obama's words will indeed seek to inspire those on Wall Street to act in the best interest of all Americans and not just for themselves. These are words wall street needs to hear. I can only hope President Obama's words will succeed in inspiring Wall Street to be better citizens and guardians of the nation's wealth. I welcome such influence.  
I have a big problem with people who are seeking elected office excepting huge amounts of money from sources that are obviously seeking to buy influence and access. This was the reason I had a problem with Hillary Clinton's big-money speeches - especially when she didn't want to tell us what she had said. I do not have a problem with people who are not seeking elected office accepting large speaking fees. President Obama will never seek elected office again. The influence of big speaking fees will not affect him in any official, elected capacity. This is not a complicated distinction.
It is no longer possible for a poor person to be President of the US.  A person may experience poverty as a child, but to achieve the presidency and to handle the out-of-pocket expenses required to be president, one must be wealthy enough to campaign and still have the normal family life expected of candidates.<br/><br/>Fortunately the Obamas were talented enough to write compelling books and hold jobs which allowed them to pay back student loans and afford a family.  They were not forced to depend on wealthy benefactors for money to be an elected official (see Sen Rubio's history) or forced to take advantage of barely legal lobbying activities.  It will not be very long before candidates will be like the NASCAR drivers or pro-golfers who wear their sponsors logos when ever they compete or speak.<br/><br/>Joining a faculty for a semester or giving speeches used to be considered the  honorable way for a former president or elected official to earn money in retirement.  Rather than be paid for his name on a board or to use influence with career contacts still in government service to win contracts or influence decisions, presidents like Reagan could simply be handed a large sum of money by corporations (foreign or domestic) to give a ghost written speech and have money to fund a graceful retirement.<br/><br/>Let us all give the Obamas the chance to fund their projects in their long lives to come without holding them to standards no one else has had to meet. Definitely not Trump while he is President!
I find myself offended by this editorial. I'm not sure why the editorial board felt the need to ask Obama to rise above those around him. Nor do I understand why there is the implied assumption that he will not put his speaker fees into his foundation. Neither do I accept the snide comment about his spending time with well-off people during this, his first hundred days post presidency. He worked extremely hard for eight years straight, and I do not begrudge him either relaxation or compensation. While I frequently felt that he was too much of a centrist for my liking, I am sure that his thoughtfulness will continue to be a characteristic, and I am looking forward to seeing how he plays out this post presidency. I am sure that his characteristic thoughtfulness will continue, and I am looking forward to seeing how he plays out this post presidency.
In order to go on living productive lives, modern ex-presidents, more than almost anyone else in society require the kind of fences that only great wealth can provide. Full stop. Taxpayers provide a security detail. But it stops there.<br/><br/>They NEED private air travel. They NEED cosseted getaways. They NEED many large, secure vehicles. They NEED staff. They NEED secure properties. As do their children. And I would prefer they are able to pay for it all themselves rather than having to sing for their supper on an a la carte basis.<br/><br/>Comparing the logistical and security challenges Harry Truman faced in his pst-presidency with the ones Barack Obama faces is like comparing a '52 Ford with a Tesla.
He's certainly entitled, without loss of respect, to ensure his family's financial security after all the sacrifices they made for this country and all the good he attempted to do in the face of great odds.  Trump is cashing in while in office. Obama is simply and smartly following the tradition of most ex-Presidents.  Nothing wrong in my opinion.
I think Pres. Obama deserves to make money for speaking to people who want to hear him. Call it compensation for the pain and suffering that he endured with dignity and unimaginable restraint for the last eight years. You don't have to be poor, or a person of modest means, to speak up for people who need a voice in our government and society. You just have to understand what their needs are and advocate for them. What will make a difference in politics is transparency and letting people know who is pouring money into candidates and the representatives campaigns. Get rid of the super pacs.
To me and probably most Americans, paying somebody $400,000 to make a speech is unseemly. We used to think only drug dealers and gangsters indulged in such wild money flouting orgies. But in the Wall Street world of finance, the world of bailouts, government backed loans and Quantitative Easing of unlimited credit at zero interest, money is cheap; "how much do you want?" <br/><br/>I had hoped that Obama would follow the lead of ex-president Carter and not the footsteps of the discredited Clintons and their money grubbing ways. Wrong! If Obama's plan is to mentor and coach, up and coming leaders in the Democratic party, we must hope they do as he says, not as he does.<br/><br/>I am also disappointed by commenters who somehow want to excuse Obama, and balance the books in his favour against the excesses and faults of the other side. The worst argument of all is, why shouldn't he be allowed to feed at trough, like everybody else? <br/><br/>But on the way to eliminating the influence of money in politics, rolling back Citizens United and influence peddling by crony capitalists, you're either on the high road or you are not. Obama, along with the Clintons, has chosen the low road. <br/><br/>Obama is just like (most) everybody else, isn't he? A reported $60 million book deal advance is not enough. I had hoped for different.
As you so rightly mentioned, Carter is the gold standard on how an ex-Presidents should act and behave.  Carter is derided for being a poor if not mediocre president. I personally think otherwise. He truly followed his principles and especially in Latin America he undid some of our worst behavior. Latin America is not perfect but is far better than the banana republics they were years ago. After leaving office, Carter truly excelled as a person.  I probably could see Obama following in his footsteps but his start has certainly been disappointing. In particular the Black community needs a leader. Obama can take that challenge and make a big difference in the lives of many African Americans. He could start with his home city of Chicago. It may be unfair to place this responsibility on Obama but greatness does not come very easily. I sincerely hope that he strives to gain that greatness and legacy, just like Jimmy Carter. 
New Ethics Rules are needed for Federal Elected and Appointed Officials after they leave office banning these exorbitant speaking fees.   Starting with Reagan, these post presidential speaking fees have gotten out of hand.  It looks, smells and feels like a "Quid Pro Quo" or pay off for what these officials did in office. It appears Wall St is rewarding Obama for going easy on them after they destroyed and crashed the world economy in 2008.   No Major figures on Wall St were ever held accountable by the US Justice Department. Dodd-Frank was a weak, watered down "reform in name only" bill that did not reinstate Glass-Steagall and has failed to hold any major Wall St players accountable for their illegal activities...In a just world, many Wall St Executives would be living on Rikers Island.  It worked for Iceland.  Iceland held financial executives accountable.  Their economy bounced back quickly with no further troubles...
If Obama was still President and accepted $400K for a speech, there would be an issue.  However, he is no longer President and therefore no longer has any power and authority over rules or regulations that impact this industry.  There is NO quid pro quo here.  Obama is not an ordinary citizen.  He is now a member of the past POTUS club, a very exclusive group.  How exactly are former Presidents expected to keep up their income?  Do you think they are going to go get an office job?  The man is not allowed to drive a car. He also has to find a way to pay for his home, 2 daughters to go to college, and another year of private school tuition for Sasha at Sidwell.  Give the man a break. Let him make money, pay his expenses, take care of his family, and then see how he decides to spend the rest.  He may very well spend it on charitable or foundation interests.  It is too early to be scolding him.  If you want to take issue with anything, it should be that any industry can afford or is willing to spend $400K on a speech by anyone.  
Hmmm.  The tone of your article suggests he was a monumental success as President.  I don't see that and I don't think history will judge him that way.  His rhetoric never matched his actions and his unvarnished contempt for, or condescension of, others damaged the public debate, relations with foreign leaders.  I believe this led us to the current vulgar President and is a core reason Sec. Clinton, campaigning on the status quo, lost.  Trump is a child born of the Obama legacy.  What history will reflect is the truth of the matter.  Completely failed foreign policy on nearly every front.  A health care plan which was high on promises but short on financial underpinnings, consistent with his political history.  He had a unique opportunity to heal old wounds of racial division.  However, when given the opportunity to match rhetoric with courage, in the public good, he choose to deepen division, polarize people and bring us lower as a country.  His legislative record in Illinois was, and remains, a testimony to his courage, or lack thereof.  He never took a courageous position as a State Senator and added little value to Illinois, which is now embroiled in a massive financial predicament.  Power, the accumulation of it, was always his primary ambition and wealth accumulation was never far behind both his and Michelle's priorities.  This decision, as disappointing as it is, is consistent with his history and should not be viewed as surprising.      
May 1, 2017<br/><br/>America's political class is great again and again whenever, wherever our former President B H Obama gives his eloquence - when in regressive age of the Trump Administration we are lost in his wasteland of incoherent noise. So legislators and jurist of the nation will and must rise to fill the vacuum that is required to keep the nation respected and in honor of its linguistic tradition that has given to the world a safe goal for transparent democratic hope, practice and above all the art of brilliant leadership for understanding and truth for all classes and diversity of private, personal registers.<br/><br/>jja Manhattan, N.Y. 
Well, what would you have him do? Speak for the Wall Street crowd for free? That would be cause for concern in my book because I'd wonder what the quid pro quo was. By getting paid for it, he is not beholden to them and these are exactly people he should be charging. They don't need to pay his rate if they don't want to.
We must get money out of politics.  This is not a partisan concern.  That is the issue that must be addressed.  I don't know whether money post office is as destructive but somehow I doubt if...  unless Obama tries to keep the pay for play mode in the Democratic party.  Some say he did just that with the election of Thomas Perez of DNC chair.  
Future candidates are watching this. Will they all give speeches to the big Wall St banks? The same ones who caused the Crash? Is a  norm being more firmly established now for future candidates and politicians? What do Wall St banks expect in return for their investment? <br/><br/>How can the Dems beat Trump unless they raise big money, competing  with their challengers?  Our democracy is being handed over.  Wall St will likely be in any future cabinets of presidents--both dem and gop. 
Statistics demonstrate that Clinton spoke most about one topic while running for president: jobs and the economy. Yet the media, especially the New York Times, focused on a trumped up email "scandal" instead,  reinvigorating years of right wing smears which Bernie Sanders then repackaged as a "revolutionary" message. If anything accounts for the working class revulsion at the Democrats, it is the repeated message that they were "corporate shills." Nice work, Bernie. Other studies have also shown that the greatest indicator of voting for Trump was racism. For the New York Times to assail a former president for speaking at a health care conference reveals the same troubling double standard it exhibited toward Clinton: What's okay for white people and for men is not permissible for black men or for women. Yes, Democrats are "out of touch" with those who would deny women their full personhood and autonomy, deny LGBTQI persons the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, and with those who consider people of color less American than they are.  
Elitism. It's why the Democrats lost in 2016.
Every day people pay to acquire wisdom, knowledge and skills. Why is it that Wall Street should not pay one of the wisest people in the country to share his wisdom? Wall Street has much to learn from Barack Obama.<br/><br/>To complain about this seems to come from conflicted and disfunctional values.
Seriously?  Why not?  Would it be better if he didn't get paid for his speech?  Isn't it a relief that Wall Street wants to hear what he has to say?  Isn't it possible that he can stay true to his values through the words of his speech?  Honestly,  why does this former President, one who cast no shame or embarrassment on either his former office or the country, have to keep holding the bar higher than anyone else before and/or after him?   The focus should not be on Barack Obama post presidency, but rather on our current president who not only has lowered the bar for all to follow him, but has indeed gotten rid of the bar altogether.  
A Nobel laureate, a former president with such an inspiring life story, may be history will compare him the likes of George Washington Carver, Dr. Charles Drew, Dr. MLK, need to stoop to this level? May be I was idealizing him too much.
Jimmy Carter is the ONLY American president that has shown true compassion, commitment, moral example and an energetic promotion of human ideals by ACTION, not words.  It's telling that ALL other ex-presidents have retired from re-entering "the fray", but have lived the lives of those 1% that they have, by action, joined.  Egalitarianism has slipped by the wayside in Amercia, swallowed up by Big Money, and a mindless self-centered narcissism eroding our society.<br/>Obama, as the first non-white president, should be owning his legacy, not contributing to its dissolution.  It's more than ironic the editorial boards would have us fixate on Obama dispersing his speaking fees to charities, etc., as we actually have a self-described BILLIONAIRE occupying the White House who gives NOTHING to charity, and in fact, used a faux charity's donations to pay his own expenses.<br/>Let's see an "editorial board" opinion on the unbridled greed and avarice, most likely criminal (although he did pay $25 MILLION to avoid a fraud conviction, a FELONY), of the successor to President Obama.<br/>Focus on that, the TAX RECORDS, THE INVESTIGATION, the IMPEACHMENT PROCEEDINGS.
Mr. Trup is costing the country A LOT more. Do not deny Obama a 400,000 fee. He may be putting it into a charitable foundation one of these days. He served his country honorably! Stop picking!!
It's one speech... one. Et tu, diurna?
Seriously, NYT?<br/><br/>For 8 years you had a president who was the human embodiment of class, propriety, and informed judgement based on an encyclopedic knowledge of geo-politics and world history, a man who was able to implement a health care system in a country whose population appears to think that auto insurance is a Marxist plot. And for his trouble he was insulted, slandered, and reviled by the press and by the yokels who would eventually elect the venal thug now ensconced in the Oval.<br/><br/>How about steering your sanctimonious outrage toward an actual perpetrator? Your current "president" has a documented half century of cheating, ripping off employees and contractors, refusing to pay his debts, and reporting charitable gifts that never happened. How about investigating the various ways he continues to line his and his family's pockets since the election, because, as he gleefully reminded the staff of this paper, "the president can't have conflicts"?<br/><br/>You complain about Obama while Trump is monetizing the West Wing? That's like telling someone with stage-4 cancer that they'd better get some Clearasil for that pimple on their chin.
I cannot recall another president who for years was badgered by a moron to produce his birth certificate, accused by many of not being a U.S. citizen, and seen himself and his family members compared to apes.   The practice of the "tea party" of comparing him to Hitler, the Joker of Batman comics, and a skeleton because he was trying to expand health insurance in America is unprecedented.  The utter obstruction of his agenda by the other party, including their refusal to consider his nomination of Judge Merrick Garland to the Supreme Court, was a power play unprecedented in its vile nature.  Now that he has left office, the (R)s are trying to deconstruct his 8-year legacy, and they are getting away with it.  <br/><br/>As far as I am concerned, President Barack Obama served his country for 8 years, did a reasonably good job, brought dignity to the office and to the nation, only to see the choice of the "electoral college" come in and throw Molotov cocktails all over everything he did in 8 years.  I never shared his expressed optimism about America and the American people, and perhaps, neither did he.  In any case, since his legacy is under attack by a gaggle of lunatics, he may as well monetize his reputation and do whatever the heck he wants with the money.<br/><br/>The NYT should be able to find something more important to write about, such as the Russian election and Dear Leader's tax returns.
Love all the defending of Saint Obama's taking "fat cat" money. This tells us<br/>1. if your heart is in the right place, anything is OK.<br/>2. Oh, and all that slamming of Wall Street? Hypocrisy matters not a lick if your heart is in the right place.<br/>3. Republicans who make $ from WS is unacceptable because they are evil and their heart is just not in the right place.<br/>4. What is good for the goose is just not good for the gander.
The BIG Differences is that Mr. Obama, Mrs. Obama, and their two daughter didn't enrich themselves and their extended families' businesses while in office. The same thing cannot be said of the current President who's wife chosen place of habitation is costing tax payers hundreds of thousands of dollars per week. Nor can it be said that he is not using his affiliations with his business by making a private resort that he owns into what he terms: The Southern White House and we tax payers are footing the bills for that little indulgence, aren't we? His daughter has no problem wearing (thus advertising) items from her businesses. No one in his family minds doing business for their copyright of names under the sheltered umbrella of International Diplomacy. Now here is an Official Editorial from the NYT commenting on a President who earned his stripes with 8 years of service to Americans; service in which he was held to higher standards than the current president/business/blow-hard. You know what the biggest differences are though? When the current President Braggart is no long President he will charge millions for a talk/speech and he will not pay a penny in taxes while the majority of Americans will be struggling to pull themselves out of the depression that is surely coming. You can bet your bottom dollar, and it will probably be your last dollar after this current presidential fiasco, that Mr. Obama and Mrs. Obama will be paying taxes on the money they earn.
'Cause Obama was dodgy from the git go.
I am thinking Justin Bieber, most NFL quarterbacks, all NBA players make more then 400k for 60 minutes performance. So not sure what's all this fuss about. This is the kind of navel gazing over Mrs. Clinton's email server that resulted in Mr. Trump being elected President. 
After being beat up by the racist amerikan public I think he more than deserves the money.  The country put him in this position and like all the rest he is getting what he deserves. I will not call this cashing in because of the racist president we now have who is "a billionaire" Barry will need the money to survive.
Seriously failing to see the problem here. Isn't this the very essence of the American Dream? Work hard, be rewarded for it. <br/><br/>Obama has every right to earn this $$ and just because he isn't living up to your lofty ideals is your problem not his. Many top journos and movie/sport stars make more than this just for showing up. Where's your self-righteousness indignation then?<br/><br/>And would still rather the Prez cash in after his time in office than during like a certain orange someone we know. His weekends at Mar-a-Lago (silly name) cost tax payers $3m per trip. And he takes a cut as owner. Perspective!
45 cam in at #1 collecting over 1.5 million per for his real estate lies but the "liberal media" nattered on and on about whatever it was Hillary got; as she is a women you can bet is was far less but a fixations especially to the tv portions of the forth estate.<br/><br/><a href="http://www.businessinsider.com/donald-trump-makes-a-lot-of-money-for-a-speech-2015-8" title="http://www.businessinsider.com/donald-trump-makes-a-lot-of-money-for-a-speech-2015-8" target="_blank">http://www.businessinsider.com/donald-trump-makes-a-lot-of-money-for-a-s...</a>
Obama, a.k.a. "Hillary Clinton, Jr." when it comes to suckling at the moneyed teat of American oligarchy.<br/><br/>Democrats are to Republicans, as Tweedledee is to Tweedledum.
This is sheer racist hovadina. Why shouldn't this noble man get paid for his efforts? Does this mean only white republican males are permitted to get paid for speeches? This attack on Obama tells clearly why the USA is becoming a dump.
Why is ayone surprised?  This is echt Obama.  I wonder who wrote the speech,
He wants the money, clearly. I always felt this was the reason Obama failed to act to protect the water protectors at Standing Rock, why he didn't stop the militarized attack on them, much less stop the pipeline as he pretty much promised at a visit to Standing Rock in 2013 (you can see it on youtube.) He didn't want to upset the apple cart /gravy train.<br/>Eisenhower sent in thousands of national guardsmen at Little Rock, Obama permitted the hounds of hell at Standing Rock.<br/>He is not, and never was, the ethical liberal president so many held onto in their dreams.
Why is this is an issue or subject of conversation.  President Obama will donate most of his book royalties to charities.  Neither he, nor Mrs. O are seeking public office.   The country need to focus on the idiot that currently occupies the WH.  At least President O is a former president, while the current occupant of the WH uses his platform to enrich himself and his family. 
Agreeing with Jon B., why doesn't the N.Y. Times make a bigger deal out of the weekly $3 million of taxpayer money he spends going to his Lar-a-Mago (lair of maggots in French)?  After all, that amounts to $150 million per year or $600 million over the course of his four year term.
HRC and BHO: two "morally corrupt" democrats who had the nerve to criticize Candidate Trump for being the candidate of 'big business'.  What's wrong with 'big business' anyway?  Isn't making money and putting it away for one's retirement the whole raison d'être of the American Dream?  There is a high demand for these corrupt Democrats' ideas so suck it up, you HRC and BHO supporters, to the Law of Supply and Demand.  I have no problem seeing these weak Democrat monkeys being paid well; I do have a problem when these same losers and their loser supporters accuse Trump and the Republicans of the same thing; when these same losers (over 'half the popular vote,' they're so happy to recall) complain about the security costs of Melania Trump and Mar-a-lago, conveniently forgetting that Trump takes no salary and has foregone his retirement to 'serve' the American people.  Do they even deserve Trump is really the question?  I have a real problem with hypocritical Democrat Losers.  Say no more...
oh, please! the man is now a *private citizen,* and is entitled to earn money in any legal manner. stop doing a Trump and take your eyes off *OBAMA.* it's TRUMP's egregious financial finanglings that need ALL YOUR ATTENTION! this is just silliness on your part. 
Interesting that it is only after we've had a black president that there is such outrage at the price of ex presidential speaking engagements. Yet, Trump's Florida golf trips continue to suck the Secret Service budget dry with nary a peep heard from the so called party of fiscal responsibility.
Let the guy earn some $$.  If he were running for president, then it would be a different story.
The Democrats are in bed with Wall Street. Huge deficit spending is debasing the dollar and driving up asset prices. Easy money on Wall Street at the expense of Main Street. Wall Street doesn't want to change anything therefore the big money to Obama who they hope will push the same agenda, higher tax rates and income equality resulting in huge government deficits and low interest rates on loans.
A couple major differences between Obama and Clinton:  magnitude and expected influence.<br/><br/>Jointly, the Clintons banked over $150 million in speaking engagements.  $150 million and it was fully understood that she would be running for President (and fully expected to win) so you have to at least consider how that might potentially influence policy and other key decisions.  Then, of course, there's the not so small issue of Clinton Foundation donations.<br/><br/>In that context, I doubt that many will begrudge the former President earning a $400k speaking fee in private life or taking an extravagant vacation--frankly, it's well earned and well deserved.<br/><br/>It does, however, beg the question as to why a similar headline editorial was nowhere to be found last fall when Ms. Clinton was running for President.
I understand the concern, and yet we have a current office-holder who is enriching himself daily while in office. I find that much more problematic, and I found Trevor Noah's argument at least worthy of consideration - why should the first black president also be the first to eschew monetizing his name?
The question this editorial raises to is, if he should not have accepted a $400k fee to speak to a Wall Street company, then what should he have done instead?<br/><br/>I see two options, 1) he could have refused to speak to the company at all, or 2) he could have spoken to them, but done it without accepting a fee, or charging a lower one.<br/><br/>In the case of option 2) the only people that benefit are the Wall Street company, since they are still getting Barack Obama to speak to them, but now at less monetary cost to themselves.<br/><br/>In the case of option 1) who benefits?  Mr Obama perhaps does not have to deal with high-minded editorials from the New York Times.  Does the 99% benefit from Mr Obama not talking to Wall Street companies?  Do we know what he said in his speech?  Perhaps he injected some of that 'moral examination of politics' into his speech, something that surely would benefit everyone for the Wall Street firm concerned to hear from someone they respect.  Do we know what he plans to do with the money?  If a significant portion of it is eventually donated to charity then the 99% have directly benefited.
What exactly is the difference of being paid to write a book or to make a speech if there is no conflict of interest?<br/><br/>The audience is paying money to hear one's views whether written or spoken or however communicated.
How dare anyone begrudge this hard-working man the same benefits every other past President has enjoyed? Many public figures are paid speaker fees when their speaking skills are laughable; President Obama is an accomplished and thoughtful speaker with the unique experience of having been President of the United States. The demand for that combination of skill and experience is great, the supply infinitesimally small. To declare he should accept anything less than market value for his services is to suggest he is somehow less than all the others, or that his life's work belongs to someone other than him. He has earned every cent he will be paid in this instance and all future ones.
No one at the Times writes books for millions of dollars?  Isn't a speech really just a verbal opinion piece?  The cost of Obama's speech is that he will never again be able to lecture us, with any authority, about the excesses of Wall Street or tell us about how inequality is bad for America.  He's profiting off that system (as did Hillary).  Something tells me Obama is comfortable with that (as is Hillary), and that is a big reason for Bernie's appeal with progressives.  
"Mr. Obama and his wife, Michelle, began their post-White House careers with twin book deals reported to be worth as much as $65 million. And why not?"<br/><br/>And why not, indeed! President and Mrs. Obama deserve to make as much as the market will pay them for their speeches, etc.,.<br/><br/>Keep your eye on the real con artist/hoax and his cronies who are currently occupying the White House. He and his family and friends are the ones who should be held under a microscope, DURING his presidency, when it comes to their earned income.
The system corrupts you and day after day you sell your heart soul ounce by ounce until finally there is none left.  In my opinion both Clintons and now Obama are examples of that.<br/><br/>“I know that as a consequence of my fund-raising I became more like the wealthy donors I met. I spent more and more of my time above the fray, outside the world of immediate hunger, disappointment, fear, irrationality, and frequent hardship of … the people that I’d entered public life to serve.”...Obama
Does being "above the fray, outside the world of immediate hunger, disappointment, fear, irrationality, and frequent hardship” necessarily prevent a man from advocating for those undergoing that hardship??<br/><br/>Does attainment of wealth via successful participation in free market, somehow, disqualify a man from being the champion of the working class?<br/><br/>Noam Chomsky has a net worth of $5 million, Elizabeth Warren $8 million.<br/>The latest Savior of the Poor du jour, Bernie Sanders owns THREE homes.<br/>I do not recall Kennedys or Roosevelts ever leading the life of penury. <br/><br/>Are we demanding President Obama to return to the life of slender means, like his childhood, as a son of working-class single-mom, lest he loses his authority as the advocate of the less-fortunate?<br/><br/>Whence cometh this audacity???
This is simply proof positive that Obama is no better or worse than the rest of them.  Or, perhaps he is worse than Harry Truman or Jimmy Carter, both of whom did not cash in on the presidency.  Even Richard Nixon dismissed his Secret Service detail about a decade after leaving office because he didn't want to burden the U.S. tax payer.  Incidentally, it was under Obama that ex presidents went back to getting Secret Service protection for life.  Previously, they were supposed only get it for 10 years after leaving office.  With the book deals, Obama could certainly have enough money to fund his own protection.  <br/><br/>I agree that he, despite the tax payer funded protection, is essentially (although not completely) a private citizen and can therefore make money.  Fine.  But, if that's the case, let's not attribute some holier than thou status on this man. 
I like Obama; he's energetic and personable; he is smart.  I didn't vote for him the second time around.  I believed at the time that he continued to advocate a failed foreign policy; moreover, he lost me at the red line. I don't understand why he is being criticized for being paid 400, 000 dollars to give a speech. Like those before him, he is simply cashing in.  It's all about money, as it has always been.  
Progressives should stop being holier than than thou. President Obama has a right to make money through speaking engagements. Right how many of us would contribute thousands of dollars if could bring Obama back as President with stewardship of the environment and his prudent, thoughtful governance.
I love the "let's have it both ways" writing in this editorial. <br/><br/>"Is it a betrayal of that sentiment for the former president to have accepted a reported $400,000 to speak to a Wall Street firm? Perhaps not..."<br/><br/>What's with the "perhaps"?? Either it is or it isn't. I vote that it isn't a betrayal. If the Times thinks it is, then come out and say so. Of course, the Times has not said that he should give away the money he gets from his book. I fail to see the difference, as the Times has no idea what the focus of that book will be. I think anyone who thinks Obama doing the wrong thing in either of those two projects smacks a bit of a holier-than-thou attitude.
The thing that irks me about Obama is his frequent choosing of double standards. He was so hyper critical of Mitt Romney's wealth and then he signs a multi-million dollar book deal. He pursues Wall Street (made up of real, often kind and very often charitable people) with a vengeance and then takes $400k for a speech. He's super against military intervention in the Middle East until he realizes just how complicated the world is and that sometimes sending soldiers is the best choice among several unappealing choices. We are all hypocrites in our own way and we all change our tune depending on circumstances - but he campaigned and governed like everything was black and white and like he was always right and everyone with a decent income was wrong - and now the tables have turned and it's suddenly okay for him to be vacationing on yachts and making millions. I say let the guy do what he wants - but that means he can't bully people who were already living the lifestyle he now aspires to and he can no longer pretend to be a "community organizer" who feels the pain of the misfortune.
I'm not sure which is the most disheartening, the incredibly high standard set for Obama and Clinton, or the incredibly low standard set for Trump. 
No surprises here. Obama does not belong on a pedestal. He was a fallible, mediocre president. In so many instances, he rejected liberal-progressive problem solving in favor of accommodating entrenched interests—discarding the public option, pivoting to the deficit during a time of economic hardship, using Social Security as a bargaining chip, failing to hold Wall Street accountable, and most egregiously promoting the TPP. His actions set an example for future presidents seeking personal gain and reflect the decline of a once-great political party. 
We are a Capitalist society and I don't want to hear Republicans complaining about President Obama receiving fair market value for his speeches.  
The TImes writes: "...a president keenly attuned to the worries and resentments of the 99 percent."<br/><br/>Obama was NEVER "keenly attuned to the worries and resentments of the 99 percent" - he did NOTHING to help and everything to sabotage the economy and put more people on government assistance.
Mr. Obama is setting a tragic precedent and I am sorely disappointed.
I don't have a problem with Obama's speaking fee, and I didn't have one with Hillary's.  Politicians have never actually lived among the poor and downtrodden they all invoke on the campaign trail. That doesn't mean they don't think or care about them.  Speaking fees are not bribes, and never were.  But at the heart of this essay is, I think, a belated realization simply that Obama was never the saint that everyone made him out to be.  He's a politician (and I don't think of that as a dirty word), and a human.  The one true thing that Trump supporters point to -- and it's a thing I think has done this country a lot of political damage over the last decade -- is the absolute unrealistic idolization of Obama during his presidency.  It was, and is, unhealthy for our democracy to idolize our President to such a degree.
I'd like to hear what Citizen Obama said in his $400K speech- seems like that's an important part of the discussion.
OK, OK, OK, enough already! Democrats continue to bring a knife to a gun fight and then look around in dismay: "what happened?" There are 33/32 Republican and 16/17 Democratic governorships/legislatures. Role modeling is one thing, but the practice is over of biting your nose to spite your face. <br/><br/>Principle is not the bastard child of money. Both can exist in the same space. To expect Barak and Michelle Obama to become lower upper-class citizens and not work the advantages they have justly achieved is short sighted and, for lack of a better term, stupid.<br/><br/>PSS has it right, focus on the majors, "Citizens United and the corruption and special interests in our current administration."
How about "The Cost of Trump's Presidency?"  This is in stark contrast to Obama, who is simply enjoying the financial fruits of his labor and station.  He earned it.  Trump has NOT.<br/><br/>We cannot let Trump get away with his plundering.  He is charging the US government left and right for this and that... and his outrageous multi-million dollar costs to ferry himself to and from his Florida resort home / club.
Sen. Sanders on CNN called Obama's paid Wall Street speech 'distasteful', Sen. Warren also said Obama’s decision on the speech ‘"troubled" her.<br/>His fee is much more than Hillary got. <br/><br/>Obama wears a halo compared to the guy now in his office. He’ll always look good vs Trump, and it will be hard to evaluate him objectively for some time.<br/>But this is the president who preserved high insurance profits for ACA and never prosecuted bankers who crashed the economy.<br/><br/>Jimmy Carter recently called our election financing legalized bribery, unlike what he experienced in the ‘70s.  Says now we veer toward oligarchy because of multi millions needed to run for office. <br/><br/>So the corporations and ultra rich aren’t just buying off our office holders, they’re also setting norms for both parties, for candidates and media. How do they define left, right, center now?   How to define ‘bribery’ and ‘influence’? <br/><br/>Turning over our elections to the rich for sponsorship means they call the shots---can’t be otherwise. Laws passed by congress will never disadvantage the 1 percent. How will  this attract politicians with a duty to we the people?  <br/><br/>The 1st priority is campaign finance reform. Then start the process of taking back our democracy from the elites who swim in the swamp with lawmakers &amp; lobbyists. They are setting norms for those aspiring to office, and those leaving office. These norms will always hurt the 99 %.
Perhaps the more urgent question is: will any Wall Street firm listen to a no-price tag attached speech given by Elizabeth Warren ?!!
Several commenters mentioned that President Carter has not accepted large speaker fees since leaving office and has been exemplary in his ethical behavior.  In fact, President Carter's popularity ratings have soared in his post presidency service to America and other countries.<br/><br/>What lessons can we draw from the Carters' behavior?
Found myself dismayed and a little betrayed upon learning of President Obama's paid speeches.  As an Obama neighborhood organizer both in 2008 and 2012 I volunteered to exhaustion for President Obama AS WELL AS donating a combined total of $5,400 to both campaigns.  (In addition I donated $2,000 to Hillary's campaign in 2016.)  <br/><br/>This is not a lot of money in comparison to the millions contributed by large donors, but it would have made the beginning of a nice little nest egg or vacation for me.<br/><br/>In the future as an active Democratic volunteer I will not be donating more than small change to Democratic presidential candidates.
Many commenters have complained that President Obama is being held to a higher standard than other presidents on this issue. Some thoughts on that complaint:<br/><br/>1. He's not being held to an impossible standard of purity here. Truman and Carter both refused to cash in after their presidencies. I always thought highly of Truman as a president, and now I think even more highly of him. Carter did not have a successful presidency, but I thought highly of him as a person, and that has only increased.<br/>2. His acceptance of a large fee from a financial institution goes against at least the spirit, if not the letter, of many speeches that he made on income inequality and financial regulation while president. It does make him look like a hypocrite for taking money from wealthy "fat cats" (to use his own words) when he publicly criticized them in the recent past.<br/>3. Most problematic is that the fee does look like a deferred bribe for his administration's refusal to prosecute anyone for the financial crisis and for its weakening of Dodd-Frank prior to passage. Many have said, "There's no quid pro quo here because he can't run for office again." They're looking at it backward; this appears to be the back-end (not the front-end) of a quid pro quo for his presidency's gentle treatment of the financial sector.
This editorial is misleading in that it does not metnion who asked Former President Obama to speak and the topic.  <br/><br/>Former President Obama was invited by the University of Chicago and a consortium of other colleges to speak on community organization and public engagement.<br/><br/>Considering that he is now a private citizen and that he and his wife give to charity and other public service organizations, he should not be critized by anyone.
Wow another 'man of the people' politician who decides the 1% are his kind of people.
I see the Russians are on again promoting Bernie Sanders.  He is their great white male hope to defeat the other democratic Presidential candidates.<br/><br/>Never too soon to keep that propaganda going.
I don't think $400k is nearly enough. Let's put it into perspective - Top entertainers often get more than $1m for private shows, and I can listen to them for free on spotify! Obama is not only an inspiring speaker, he is a man of integrity and values who has comported himself with grace and dignity through extremely difficult times while under the scrutiny of the world, dealing with blatant racist invective. He learned a great deal in his 8 years as president, emerging more thoughtful, wise and humble than he was when he began. We all have a lot to learn from him, and though we need not agree with his policies, his insight and ability to inspire is priceless. I have every reason to believe that he will funnel his resources to ensure his legacy of elevating those who have been underserved. Go for it Obama - you deserve it! 
It's not the taking of the money per se that is galling. It is a) the greed (after all, he IS getting $65 million for a book, why does he need more? Not for legal debts), and b) the hypocrisy--one of the slammer's of Wall Street getting into bed with them. It is the hypocrisy of the Democratic Party, and liberals in general, that is one of the single biggest factors why people support Trump. Trump is garish and sometimes crude, but a hypocrite he is not, at least compared to libs. 
I am a Republican and am not and never have been a fan of President Obama, but he can do whatever he wants.  
We have no idea how he is going to spend this money, but I wouldn't be surprised if he uses it for good. Take bloated Wall Street's money and use it for good causes! I hope anyone with the opportunity would do so. And in Obama's case, he had the chance to inspire and change some minds through his speech too.
Barack Obama<br/>Will soon be as rich as Trump<br/>Ain't politics great!
"And it shows surprising tone deafness, more likely to be expected from the billionaires the Obamas have vacationed with these past months than from a president keenly attuned to the worries and resentments of the 99 percent."  <br/><br/>Really?  Then I challenge the NYT Editorial Board to name just one policy enacted by liberals since the cultural revolution of the late sixties--not just Obama's terms--that has benefited the native American middle and working classes.<br/><br/>Once you answer this question, then you will understand not only why Democrats control no elected branches of the national government, as well as why a populist/ethnonationalist revolution is sweeping virtually ever Western nation.
I kinda wish he hadn't but where is it written that Obama must hold to a higher standard than any of his modern predecessors? Given the over-the-top abuse and his family were subjected to, frankly he deserves anything he can get in his post-presidential years. But.....and yes, there's a but, maybe some are holding him to a higher standard because HE held himself to a higher standard, in word and in deed. 
It is not the relative comparison of Trump to Obama that makes this fee unpalatable. It is the basic understanding and acceptance that this is OK even though the Obama's have plenty of money by any standard. Will another $400k, really change their life style?  Or would refusing it cement his legacy and adherence speaking to the good of all?
Speaking to Wall Street didn't help voters believe that Hillary was on their side. It made them skeptical and made her middle class working class campaign look like the phony focus group driven drivel that it was.<br/>Both the Clintons and President Obama aren't really champions of the People. They are technocratic politicians who work for the elite. They make populist noises, but they really don't believe in economic democracy or uplifting the welfare of the poor or the working poor., at least as long as it might cost the 1% money or power. They are of, by and for the 1% and while they may be social liberals, they are economic royalists.<br/>That's why they can't win an election anymore. The people are on to them. Unfortunately the People who were betrayed by their democratic party turned to an allegedly populist Trump and his trickle-up Republicans who work only for the rich.
Really? I'm much more concerned with the person making money off the presidency while he's IN OFFICE. 
At least he will become a Billionaire before Hillary. 
Mr Obama has made the wealthy more so. Why not ask for a little in return? Quid pro quo.
I go out and buy a $4 cup of coffee.   It take two days of work to earn those four dollars for many, if not most, of the people on this planet.  It is easy (and lazy as my mom would say) to look at the world as black and white; in simplistic terms.  Barack was raised up because he too spoke in slogans and rallied through visceral, cheerleading terms.  He was given a peace prize for the simplistic belief that enthusiasm can change the world.  David Brooks once noted that he could understand Donald, Bernie, and Barack because they had simple rallying cries that people could understand.  Brooks could not understand Hillary because her message was complicated - it takes extremely hard work, study, and incremental steps (often very small and some to the other side and even backward to gain broad sustainable support) to make lasting change for the better.  We elect Knights in shining  armor who speak as heroes who valiantly slay the dragon and then we find out they are real people and our little hearts are crushed.  Maybe we should hire a real person to lead whose message is that  life is hard, complicated, and victories don't come with fanfare but come an inch at a time with sweat and effort.  We don't need a knight to lead us, we need someone who works hard, doesn't care about photo ops, who focuses on the next generation, and can endure - basically a mom.  Take down the pedestals, because no one should govern from above and besides, they will eventually fall off.
It's an out of date term, but 'selling out' sadly comes to mind.  
You have got to be kidding. You are picking the wrong target for criticism. Even if you knew what they were going to do with the money. Which is none of your business.That 400 grand from Wall St. is going to go somewhere. Why shouldn't it go to someone whose integrity has not and will not be compromised. Why am I so sure? I read the book, too. Anyone with that much insight and perceptive introspection, and the ability to convey those ideas so eloquently is not going to betray his principles.  
Why should Obama doing the full Clinton surprise anybody? Obama kowtowed to Wall Street during his Presidency, consigning millions of homeowners to ruin with his tepidly farcical remedies. The only time he ever displayed any progressivism was while campaigning, where he would morph from his usual 1972 Richard Nixon to an awkward 1903 Teddy Roosevelt. It was a sickeningly cynical display, which he repeated like clockwork. To hear the almost universal approbation here of his right to make an "honest buck" from critics of the Trump kleptocracy is just as insulting.
When will Democrats quit worshiping this false prophet and notice that their grievances have never been assuaged by him. I voted for him twice but if he could have run again I would not have repeated that mistake. His weakness and the Democratic Party's refusal to embrace real change have brought us Trump. "Above the fray" was his style and it proved to be too shallow for our very real needs in these most perilous of times. Wake up America! You have been buying packaged products instead of electing real men of proven depth and commitment to the common weal. 
It's one thing to insist (or at least hope) that money isn't used to influence sitting politicians.  It's quite another to hold that former politicians shouldn't accept money for giving speeches.  That's a ridiculously high and completely unnecessary standard.   And anyway: why speeches and not books or TV appearances?  And if a former President shouldn't get paid for giving a speech to a company, should anyone else, or is it a morally suspicious thing to do across the board?
President Obama has a right make a living and maximize the fruits of market economy i.e. if they are willing to pay, why not? I have a suggestion though. How about he raises the tag to $800,000 and then for every paid speech, he should do a pro bono speech to a class of people who would never have a dime to pay him. That would include non-prepy schools, non profits, halfway houses and so on...
How can we presume to know what Mr. and Mrs. Obama intend to do with their money?<br/><br/>Maybe they'll build a foundation, maybe they'll just stash the cash, maybe they'll give it away (Mr. and Mrs. Obama wrote personal checks to those in need while they were in the White House so it's a possibility that they'll continue to be good, charitable people).
This is outrage over a faux crisis and it's one of the reasons the Democrats keep losing.  An unrealistic expectation of actions and motives purer than the driven snow. resulting in a circular firing squad.  Obama out of touch with middle America, working poor and minorities?  Compared to Trump?  Obama speaking to fat cats about health care is a good thing.  He should speak out about his political point of view to every audience whether it's a paid speech or not.  His every day choices over the span of his political life stands up quite well versus the lack of core values espoused by the current White House resident.  There is a long record of wealth and public service throughout the political spectrum, i.e., the Rockefeller's, Kennedy's and Bushes just to name a few.   It isn't the audience for a speech, or whether and how much money is received, it's what values and policies are you speaking about.   
The comments here truly illuminate that tribalism is still the base instinct of humans: when Republicans give paid speeches to Wall Street - bad, when Obama gives paid speeches to Wall Street - totally fine, and mind your business while you're at it! 
Are the Obamas and the Clintons the first of the retired American presidents to pamper themselves with the best of everything that money can buy, post presidency? I realize I am not typical, but it doesn't sit well with me. It speaks to character and seriousness of purpose.<br/><br/>I can hardly believe I am saying this, but I find my heart has softened some toward the Bushes in their respective retirements. HW, a pilot in WWII, treated himself to an annual sky dive, while he was able; and why not? He earned it. W seems to have worked on his inner peace within the encircling arms of his family and through his painting.<br/><br/>From what I have read about Bill's deal brokering with the Russian oligarchs for things like uranium rights, however, I simply cringe; while Hillary's Wall Street speeches achieved a certain notoriety.<br/><br/>Having returned from their fabulous vacation--one that no American all the way up through the upper middle class and several rungs up the wealth ladder beyond that--can ever hope to experience, can the Obamas now settle for lives of purpose? Hope so. But if that includes giving $400,000 speeches to Wall Street, I hope he would not be constrained from publishing the gist of his thoughts and advice in the NYTimes. If there is a non-disclosure agreement, what does that tell a person?
For real?  The NYT is raking Mr. Obama over the coals while we have a current President who is in direct violation of the emoluments clause?  AND also gives them a kick for vacationing with millionaire friends?  So, not only should they only make x amount for any speeches, but their friends are suspect?  And the current President has invited corrupt dictators such as Sisi and now Duterte to the White House? Give me a break.  
Pres Obama and Mrs Obama deserve triple that per speech. Why not? Anything they want they should have. How dare you question them. I find the commentary offensive.
ALL presidents do this. At least in modern times. That's their job after they leave office.<br/>Unless, of course, you're as evolved as Jimmy Carter and prefer to build houses for people who have none.
Rules are different for liberals in the pocket of wall st banks--it's only money.
It's perfectly fine.  He's a man of the left.  Nothing to see here.
Now you pile on former Pres. Obama for trying to "cash in". Although his Presidency was a disaster for this country, he's entitled to make a buck or two after all of the abuse he suffered over the past eight years. The Times forgets we're a democracy... your constant focus on class warfare, the 1%, etc. has contributed to tearing this country apart between the haves and the have nots... Which by the way, was all created and fostered by Pres. Obama during his eight years as President.<br/>Folks who work (essentially the "haves") and make decent money aren't evil..... but neither are the folks who want free healthcare and a college education (but don't want to work for it)... they're just liberal democrats.  
Why doesn't the NYT spend time and energy criticizing the unfit occupier of the White House and leave President Obama alone.??? Your picking apart of his actions is a waste of time and I for one, am sick and tired of it.<br/> President Obama may not have done everything that everyone wanted, but he had dignity and represented our country without making us a global joke.<br/>If you choose to be a detractor, choose a subject that has relevance in today's situation and look at the foolish buffoon with mental health issues who is steering us, (with the GOP's help) into disaster.
Even in this article you cannot resist taking a dig at Hillary Clinton. You don't get it. Your coverage of Hillary Clinton has been biased and unfair from Safire's vicious op ed piece through today. We have your coverage to partially thank for President Trump who you now endeavor to normalize. 
Thank you, NY Times for voicing what I suspect many concerned citizens in addition to myself have been feeling in light of this news. It's a relief to see this public, necessary criticism. Why shouldn't we holding former President Obama to the higher standards he represented in public office? The Democratic party needs hope and inspiration -- not more of the same elitism that disenfranchised so many voters and heavily contributed to the situation we're in now. Without examples from leaders in the Democratic party, I can't see how we'll be any better off in 2020. Man up, Obama -- donate the funds!
"The Democratic Party badly needs such an example to follow. As the presidential election clarified so painfully, the traditional party of working people has lost touch with them"<br/><br/>The suggestion is that by setting a noble example, Obama could lead the Democratic Party out of the corporate controlled wilderness and back to helping narrow the gap between the 99% and the 1%. And this noble example could begin by charging less for talks.<br/><br/>Well, Obama made many attempts during his Presidency over 8 years, and Sanders and Warren have been beating that drum, fighting that fight, continuously. If the Dems can't shake off corporate control it's not for lack of role models.
Holding President Obama and  Mrs Obama to some utopian ideal in our current political environment does not seem justified a bit to me.<br/>When even the president of USA does not show his taxes or how he benefits on the new tax structure his team proposes , its feels pretty in appropriate to hold the Dems and the Obamas into such 1960s standard.<br/>The American diaspora does not even seem to care when they elected  President Trump. Even the current American women voters did not care when they heard such lurid comments from a presidential candidate!<br/>So what are we lamenting at !<br/> I do not think America wish to get back to the 50s  gold standards of which even Nixon upheld  by resigning!
I think it is not an issue, after all who should decide how much to pay for somebody's speech. I think in this instance the free market should determine the price.
Here we go again.  Why does the NYT (or anyone else) feel justified to hold the Obamas to a higher standard than...well, *everyone* else?  <br/><br/>In recent days I've read (and agreed with) a number of columns that suggest there is an amorality to hoarding obscene wealth, and I agree with that philosophy.  However, the Obamas have amply demonstrated their inclination and ability to devote themselves to the greater good, and have pledged to continue. I don't begrudge them the opportunity to do so--or, if they prefer, to do as other presidential couples have done and take time to recoup and recover from the personal losses of the most contentious, scrutinized and obstructed eight years in the White House.  I certainly don't pretend that I can make better decisions about their funding to proceed with either goal than they can.  I don't think other people should, either.
Over the next four years there will be a continuing dialogue about our country's underlying values. Obama's contribution to that discussion can be enormously important, but it will rest upon the respect that people have for him, his motives, and the consistency of his positions. By taking this payment for his speech, Obama is jeopardizing that respect. If that happens it will be a tragedy. It is no answer to this to argue the simplistic syllogism that private citizens are free to earn money in any legal way, Obama is a private citizen, therefore there's no basis for criticizing the payment he's receiving. That argument misses the central point entirely.  And it's no cure for Obama to donate the payment to charity after the fact; that looks like an admission of error. I would have been much better if he had directed at the very outset, as part of the arrangements, that the money from the speech be paid to a charity or charities of his designation. The editorial board is right.
Any ex-President is free to do as he or she pleases, they have no further obligation to the nation. <br/><br/>Should Mr. Obama decide to continue as a public role model and leader, I think it would be great if he could set an example by keeping 1/3 of speaking fees, and donate 2/3 to worthy causes, ideally related to the spread of democracy, freedom of speech, voting rights, human rights, etc.
Yes, it does at the very least show "tone deafness".  Also hypocrisy, but that is to be expected of Democrat party former presidents and nominated party candidates.  Upon departing the office/campaign trail, Mr. Clinton, Ms. Clinton, and Mr. Obama all immediately ran to Wall Street bankers and hedge fund allies to cash in.  This is where the money is and this is what they do.
Interestingly enough. Reagan made a bit, George W, a paltry amount.  Bill and Hillary raked in roughly $31M in 4 years and Nancy Pelosi is worth $400M. Does it really look like the Democrats are for the working classes.<br/><br/>Let's give the business folks a chance to run the Gov, they can't do worse than the last 27 years. And they actually earned their own wealth, what a concept.
@Antione<br/>"How can Obama still be an undisputable voice if he accepts money from people with very specific interest? "<br/>Why should he be "an undisputable voice"? He was one for 8 years. The heavy lift that he had while in office was handled with an extremely high standard. Name one act on his part that caused pause as to whether or not he was acting on his behalf personally as opposed to the people he was voted in to represent... just one. What he makes as a private citizen is not my concern. In my opinion he can stand firmly on his record with his head held high. Can we say the same for 45? In closing, it is someone else's turn to be the "undisputable voice." Would someone please step up? And when they do, they will have to work very hard to  match the humility, grace and effort of President Obama. He was not perfect but he represented us with Honor and Dignity. Yes. I used capital H and D.
Enough! No one gave two figs about this when it was not a man of color or a woman.  Let's save the Opinion Page for real issues.  It's none of our business. None of our business. I'm still waiting to see the 45's tax returns.  That's a real issue.
Has anyone asked Obama how he would respond to the folks who are critical of his taking advantage of an offer such as this?  For 8 years, I felt that he would always do the right thing for the right reasons and that every decision was carefully thought out.  I don't think he has changed and has suddenly become a greedy opportunist cashing in on his fame.   Why do the financiers think they are going to get for their $400,000?    What do his critics think they will get for their investment?   With so much bribery and actual corruption going on at every level of business and government, I fail to see how this falls anywhere near something to be concerned about or deserving of so much negative attention.    Once again, it shows one standard for the Obamas that is higher than for just about anyone else.  
I still fail to see the problem with the President taking $400,000 in speaking fees. There seems to be some automatic conclusion that people are coming to that have no basis in fact. There is nothing inherently corruptible about working on Wall Street, in Finance or being wealthy. There is nothing inherently evil when Hillary did it or as Obama does it.  I think people who keep making these claims need to finish out there though process and actually make the accusations that they maybe not realize they are making. If they finish the accusation maybe they'll realize how foolish they are.
It is just about the money, because that seems to be your concern.  Be assured that Canter Fitzgerald can well afford to pay any fee Obama might demand.  As for Obama becoming corrupted by accepting that fee, he wasn't corrupted at any time during his presidency so I think you can put aside your concern as to Barrack's future purity.  And, he might just contribute the money to a worthy charity, who knows.  In any event I'm very comfortable leaving these decisions up to a man who has shown for the past 8 years that he has his head squarely on his shoulders and doesn't need the NY Times' advice.
Money talks. A lot of money talks more.
I was hoping the "Serious Tubmans..." line at his last correspondence dinner was a joke. He really tarnished his rep with this one.
The whole premise of this article and the press this is receiving is the problem. I applaud Obama for making speeches for money. He was an incredible president and an incredible leader. He more than deserves this and it is not the business of anyone to judge or comment except to say congratulations and well deserved. 
I think it should be against the law for former presidents to cash in after office. How will we ever know that these "speeches" are  not kickbacks for some things he did not fight hard enough for while he was president? A typical greedy narcissist like the rest of them. (And I voted for him.)
The best comment in this section:<br/> HANK Newark, DE<br/>"I look at it as just compensation for the horrendous disrespect and abuse opposition politicians and citizenry heaped on him for 8 years."
President Obama's first to appointments were corporate and Wall street lackeys (Larry Summers and Timothy Geithner) Did anyone expect him to do anything but work for corporations and Wall Street.
Alas, by the standards of first-world nations, our government is extremely corrupt.  There is simply no other way to put it.<br/><br/>The Clintons swam in this water for so long that they are apparently no longer aware of its existence.<br/><br/>It was not always so.  Most notably, Harry Truman chose to not profit from his position at all.  In the ensuing 65 years we have had a perverted variant of Gresham's Law unfold - bad behavior drives good behavior out of circulation.  Unfortunately, we have gotten to the point where Obama would be a fool not to cash in.  If he demurred, nothing in the greater system would change, and he would merely deprive himself and his family for no good reason.
All these outraged responders should check out Professor Google's list of speaker fees for former Presidents and Public officials.  Obama is on the low end.  Even before he was President Mr Trump never appeared for less than $1m
Extremely disappointing how fast the entire family has cashed in.  They are all 1% now and will never look back.  Free money is evidently hard to turn down.  Most of us will never know.  <br/><br/>Now it's off to lunch with Bono wearing complimentary high fashion, then free golf.  What do they need money for?  Ex-presidents get everything for free.<br/><br/>Disgusting and I have lost my respect for them, along with all the others with the exception of the Carters .  In this day and age of endless greed, is it too much to ask that they at least pay for their own security?<br/><br/>Because the taxpayers have no responsibility to subsidize the business ventures of these greedy jerks.  It makes me sick to my stomach.
I would pay to hear Michelle speak at or for Planned Parenthood.  I would pay to hear her speak anywhere.  She can bring public attention to the plight of millions of women who are now unable to get the health care they need because of the angry opposition in congress.  If she could persuade one member to walk in the shoes of a mother needlessly dying of uterine cancer because she didn't have nearby healthcare to diagnose a curable disease if found early, she would have earned my respect and what money I could afford.  Please don't confuse knowledge with hypocrisy.  Both the Obamas have much to tell the world and should do so no matter what the price.  
Voted for him twice, but bailing out the banks then getting paid $400K by them to speak just stinks.  That other people do it is no excuse.  No one has any shame (or ethics) any more.
A German friend of mine once said, in broken English, 'No matter how we do it is it wrong.'  First people complained that President Obama was too reserved, not aggressive enough, he shouldn't take such a high road.  Now, they pick him apart for simply being paid what lot's of others have been paid to speak, and that he should take a higher road.  Flip, flop much?  In my opinion, he deserves every penny he gets!
What do you want - he was a smart, involved, neo-liberal president who had the capacity to read more than one page. He tried to make things better - albeit within the rapacious free market system- but he looks like a God now. It would be great if he set an ethical standard, but if you expected that of him, you weren't fully paying attention.<br/><br/>Frankly, I was more disappointed in his making a beeline to hang out with with Richard Branson. Oof.
Absurd.  President Obama served this country well and honorably for eight years.  The fact that he now commands handsome fees to give speeches is well-earned compensation for that service, and helps balance out the relatively paltry salary that we pay Presidents, as compared to the incomes of, say, "law firm partners, investment bankers, hedge fund managers and venture capitalists," all of whom earn millions or more every year.<br/><br/>I am disappointed that the Times would take such a cheap shot at President Obama.
  Like Gorbachev who tried to reform the Soviet system and failed, Obama will go down as one of the great (if well-intentioned) failures in history.  Gorbachev  (who, by the way was also awarded a Nobel Peace Prize he didn't deserve) paved the way for Putin; Obama's failure as a political leader paved the way for Trump. His use of easily reversible executive orders to cement his "legacy," is symptomatic of a "chief executive" who could not deign to dirty his hands with politics.  He talked a good game, but he yielded on every issue. <br/><br/>So let him take his $400,000 from his Wall Street friends. A booby prize for one of the most disastrous presidencies in American history, to be exceeded only by the one that followed. 
Much of President Obama's cultural significance rests on his undisputed moral authority.  He severely compromised it last week, and the NY Times is correct to point it out.
Seriously?<br/>You have figured out how a term-limited former President should earn or spend his money?<br/>Set up a foundation? Using what? Oh, wait. Maybe from money earned making speeches.<br/>Oh, and since we're apparently into expressing outrage, 32 football players got drafted this past week, all of whom will receive paychecks way beyond their true societal value. And then there's the money paid to someone who hits home runs. And musicians who have hit records. And actors who... To say nothing of hedge fund managers, senior officers in public corporations and at investment businesses.<br/><br/>But wait! Barack Obama made $400K. <br/><br/>Yikes!
Perhaps Obama will follow Trump's example and donate the money to charity.<br/>That would be the 400K from the speech he might donate, not the 65 million from the book deals.
Jeeze.  Will the new leaders trained by the Obamas systematically ignore state and local government and continue the decades long Democratic tradition of organizational collapse at the grass roots?
I'm glad to see that greed is still good in America.  While we're hating Trump for being Trump, and while the Republicans are steamrolling all those bills to deregulate the economy and the justice system for those with money and guns, the people in the middle and the bottom can just suck it up and do the best they can while to elite Republicans and the elite Democrats cash in.<br/><br/>I'm glad that President Obama never sent any corporate executives to jail for that little misunderstanding in 2008.  He deserves his long vacation and his fat paychecks for keeping America all business.  Great is good!  Keep up the good work.
And in one fell swoop Obama does more to sabotage his own legacy than Trump could do in 100 days. Sad...
Because he will have two kids in college.
Obama wants to get rich. So he's using his past occupancy of the Oval Office to do so. It's a free country still, so I have no problem with what he is doing,<br/><br/>I'm guessing the problem people are having is that Obama has been held up as some sort of saint. He was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize BEFORE he ever took office. For 8 years, he maintained a sanctimonious tone while the MSM told us what a noble unselfish statesman he was. Now, his charging $400,000 per speech kind of makes it hard for people to keep seeing him such a beatific light.<br/><br/>If people had viewed him in a more realistic light, they wouldn't be so concerned today.
The actors of some tv shows make over $400,000 for a half-hour episode...is the former president of the country not worth as much as an actor? The "worth" of someone's time is highly arbitrary - just read the Parade magazine's annual income section....doesn't bother me in the least - good luck to the Obama family. 
How else will he pay the rent for his Washington home?
I'd expect this opinion piece from Fox News ("too much golf!") not the NYT. Obama was a great president and an inspiration to the world. He speaks for free to the "have-nots" and charges a fortune to the "haves" who can afford it and need to hear what he has to say. Why should speak for LESS that what Wall Street is willing to pay to hear him speak? 
You don't know President Obama's intentions (though your best guess should be based on his past.) Nor do you know the intensity of threats he and his family must now respond to, by hiring private security advisors. (Again, our guess should be based on the past as well as the increased racism and violence that Trump and supporters incite.) <br/><br/>Someday soon I hope to see your editorial examining the NYT choices that have been dictated in the last year by advertising money, your business management and Wall St. interests, and your owners.  <br/><br/>Is it a betrayal of your longstanding principles and integrity to print news stories that misrepresent  without later corrections, and to print opinion pieces without fact checking?  Many of your readers and staff seem to believe it is a betrayal. 
Obeya: "Hope And Change". Ya, right.<br/><br/>More like "$400K And Change"
I cannot be as thoughtful and mature as the comments before. I can't believe the editorial board wasted a calorie on this article. Why is Barack Obama held to a higher standard than any previous president - WHY? I can think of a few timely topics just from this weekend spoon fed from this exhaustive administration that would have given your readers much to debate. <br/><br/>No wonder readers are getting dubious of the media. Whatever the intentions, on the surface, it feels like clickbait and that is the least of it's concerns. 
To the NYT's Editorial Board - I guess you are clairvoyant and know what Pres. Obama will speak on and what he plans to do with his speaking fees.  Well I don't.  Rather than being irrationally judgmental and condemning, why not focus on how Pres. Obama's speech could be consistent with the beliefs he's expressed.<br/>By the way, this pontification from an entity that has pandered to DJT over the years is the height of hypocrisy.
The easiest explanation is that he was never that way to begin with. The NYT never reported anything negative about him. That's the error. Not with Obama but with the media portrait of silence which pretty much elected trump.
Why the surprise and outrage? Politics and money have become the happiest married couple in the US - and elsewhere. Money drives the agenda; empowers legislation. Show me a down-and-out federal politician and I'll show you a complete dummy.
It is classic Obama to talk as if he's above the fray, when in reality he was always knee deep in it. Obama would always say one thing, but do another. In other words, he's just a politician.<br/><br/>This was crystal clear when the health insurance companies and Big Pharma wrote Obamacare behind closed doors with no public option, and no drug companies bidding on contracts.<br/><br/>And it was crystal clear when Obama prosecuted ZERO people for the fraud on Wall Street after the banking crisis. ZERO.<br/><br/>And he certainly didn't care about the poor kids in Washington D.C. when he axed vouchers, which literally kicked poor Black kids out of the same school Obama's daughters went to.
Holier than thou leftists (may the gods bless them and their agenda) and snarky Obama haters on the right seem more than ready to assume not confronting the Big Buck Boys of the world with speeches from Obama is the way to go.  Fats Waller said money makes you funny and that seems to be the case here.  My friends on the left fret and fume over the big pay day because  . . . why?  I guess they never really trusted Obama and now think $400K will put him in The Street's pocket.  And on the right, smug and Trump-like, Obama is just going for the long green.  What's new they say.  Give us break, people.  Read the speeches Obama makes and then pass your from on high judgments.  This goes double for the editorial board of the NYT.  
Give him a pass.It's not what Democrats do that counts,it's what they say.So Oprah can have 6 or more homes,with tons of empty rooms and it's OK,as long as she says she supports the socialist cause.
So, like it or not, the Wall st investment community does serve important functions for the society, as a whole, and as these functions and their interests both rely on astute and up to the date capture complex national and international political and policy landscapes, would not they justifiably wish to hear the thinking of an ex-President or ex Cabinet Secretary?  If justifiably they should be interested, are you suggesting that such officials should offer their wisdom to Wall St, of ALL sectors, for FREE!  Former Presidents and other high level official are citizens of the world and, especially if relatively young, as Obama is, might be expected to maintain vigorous travel and speaking schedules to participate in critical world-shaping activities including even volunteer efforts to help less fortunate peoples.  All of this freedom to be an engaged resource costs money, at some point, beyond what a presidential pension affords.  So maybe the really unfortunate thing is the knee-jerk reaction among certain 'progressives' that assumes that one is a 'tool' for ever being compensated for sharing of one's experience and wisdom.  Enough of this nonsense.  This purist attitude already is the single most dispositive factor that has given us the disastrously incompetent and mean-spirited administration that currently we are saddled with. It's time to dump the self-righteous puritanism and work to find real solutions to real problems. 
Anyone who says that they wouldn't accept that money is lying.<br/><br/>Most of those people have never raised taxes on people who make less than that amount in an entire year.<br/><br/>But Mr. Obama is at the precipice of earning absurd money- he will very soon, at these rates, have so much money that taxes will not affect his lifestyle. In other words, he is completely insulated from the decisions he made.<br/><br/>It is disgusting. Raise taxes on people who make a great living, and use your political fame to catapult into stratospheric wealth... didn't someone lose an election in part because of that?
If President Obama accepted $250,000 for the speech, would it matter? Some report that the Clinton's make $200,00 to $250,000 for a speaking engagement. The most recent former president is supposed to accept a speaking fee less than or equal to the president who left office 16 years ago? That would be a mind-blowing poor financial decision on Obama's part. <br/><br/>Given Obama's somewhat contentious relationship with Wall Street, I'm fascinated that he would be invited to speak at any of the Street's firms. If we want financial reform in this country, if we want investment firms to practice ethically for investors, especially small investors, then someone with influence needs to speak to and with them. I can think of no one better than the man who put into effect rules and practices to protect investors.<br/><br/>What President Obama chooses to do with the money he earns is his business, but I am willing to bet that a man who believes in service to community and to country will not pocket all of his earnings for a life of luxury. <br/><br/>The more you earn, the more you have, the more you can do for others. <br/><br/>Lastly, I find it interesting that before we know how Obama will spend his post-presidential earnings, we're ready to criticize and in some cases condemn. Not that much difference to when he was in office. Ahhh! Consistency.
As far as I can, the topic of Obama's speech are his giving it (apart form his payment) aren't unethical or unseemly.  So: What is unethical or unseemly in his $400,000 payment?  Should he have refused to give the speech for any amount over his travel costs?  Or his travel costs plus $5000, or... What is the "just price"?  Should he, perhaps, pay for the privilege of giving the speech?
Bad, bad start.  Unless, the money is used to counter harmful aspects of the giver's impact on the well being of people and society.
Liberals distract themselves with this kind of Bernie-inspired insipid outrage. Put your energy into running for office or voting for those who will change the laws that have poured money into our political system, or have made it legal for most of Wall Street's shenanigans. The right loves it when the left picks up their propaganda about optics, and the left reaps no benefit. 
The Obamas have a clear agenda of fighting the Alt-right damage to our institutions and to the majority of Americans. Visit their website and read about it. Building an organization, like anything else, costs money; and they will earn it the best way they know how. This editorial will be cast into the regret pile in the coming years! 
This article is rather judgmental on several levels:<br/>a) Let's hold off on the character bashing perhaps - at least until one see's what he may do with that considerable sum (and others to follow.)<br/>b) I certainly don't mind Mr. Obama lifting off with some Wall St. cash - its not exactly like he's taking candy from a baby.<br/>c) This is our capitalistic system - to be all that is possible and prosper - is it not?<br/>d) Perspective - let's keep some. There are basketball players who are paid upwards of $20,000 for each two-pointer.
Reagan got 2 MILLION from foreign interests (Japanese) just after leaving office. That's more than 4 million in 2016 dollars, But again, Obama gets criticized for much less. Sigh.
Very simple, Mr Obama should donate the proceeds to the charity of his choice.<br/>This (in my opinion) completely eliminates any improper optics. 
Mr. Obama, as much as I respect him and am grateful that he became the first Black President, enduring countless racist attacks, is and has always been a staunch supporter of the present economic system. By policy, he tried to be kinder, at least to USers. It is mostly racism, I think, that kept the unboundlessly greedy 1% from realizing how good it was with him. They should have fought for a 3rd Obama term! They may not have "gotten it all" on his watch, but they got stable and grew. <br/><br/>The abomination of White Trump and his white administration may be handing the 1% what they think they want, but it will be a passing phase and will only hasten their demise. The insatiable greed is unsustainable. Their rule is painful but someday it will be over, hopefully by the timely action of people with rational ideas about society. Hopefully not by the extinction of our species.<br/><br/>How about the Times contributing to the former. Please, Times, be upset about the unsustainability of the current economic system. Seriously. Can economic chaos, the hallmark of capitalism, really continue to make good lives for people and the planet? Can continued capitalism be regulated enough to sustain us and the planet, as Mr. Obama seemed to believe?<br/><br/>As for Mr. Obama, it is consistent with who he is that he takes this money. Don't be so upset. In the scheme of things, I honor him and his family for inspiring millions and enduring so much hatred. We have lots to learn from his presidency; let's learn it.
This is the equivalence of going after conservative politicians when they aren't as true to their "family values" as they claim to be when they position for political gains. Republicans claim the moral high ground on personal values and Dems claim to be for the little guy. Surprise, surprise - politicians are politicians and don't always behave like they pretend when personal interests get in the way. The only surprising thing to me is the NYT Editorial Board and many readers here who continue to believe that Mr. Obama is a knight in shining armor. He is a successful, former President who intends to live the lifestyle associated with wealthy people and he needs a lot of money to do so. Period
This former president, who has paid his tax, posted his returns on line, donated to charity, is asked to decline the speaking fees that similar heads of departments, movie stars, literary figures etc receive when addressing groups with sufficient wealth to pay. So far as we know, no group who were employed by Mr. Obama went unpaid. He didn't threaten workers. Borrow laundered money from oligarchs to maintain a lavish lifestyle.  Didn't claim other people's losses to avoid paying his own income tax. The NYT hasn't asked football or entertainment figures to work for free. Why this former president? 
I don't know, I think he probably deserves $400k just for having spent even one hour in the same room as Paul Ryan and Mitch McConnell and not going for their throats.<br/><br/>After what he and his family were subjected to for 8 years, after watching the opposition ruin the opportunity offered by a man of his intellect and caliber, I wouldn't blame him if he grabbed every penny he could get his hands on and left for a foreign country to live out the remainder of his days forbidding anyone to ever say the words "United States of America" to him again.
The voters who swung the last election would not care now if any Republican did the same.  Nor would most Democrats change their votes.  A President is not obliged to live his life according to the values the Editorial Board of The New York Times practices in writing.  Why shouldn't they and all leaders in our society  be held to the same standard?  And for what purpose?
Why does President Obama have to set a higher standard for anyone? He already set the highest standard for tolerance of disrespect and racial abuse for almost any public official.  I know he will make better use of this money by just continuing to demonstrate grace under fire for the rest of us. President Obama does not owe anybody anything. Good for him.
I'm not bothered by his fee because I already knew he was just another limousine liberal.  Instead I take exception at the writer "rather than the workaday vulgarity" ah yes, those disgusting deplorables who work 40 hours a week and stink of their own sweat and had the nerve to not shut up and vote like they were told to by their intellectual betters.  The real vulgarity and the real deplorable fact is that a pampered billionaire knew more of their struggle for survival than the party, the media, and the champions who claimed they were there for them.
It may be the "Best of times" for some, while the "Worst of times" for so many "countless"....who do not feel counted. Meanwhile, we continue to<br/>Normalize the Abnormality of our present "President".  I lament the reality<br/>that this Man flaunts the gift of his "finger" to the majority of the American<br/>Public. (He has yet to "address" that Public, while choosing, of course, to address his delegated followers.)  We, the People, are being led (or Ruled)<br/>by his Sociopathy, the Symptom list of which has been delineated by a few<br/>commenting Psychiatrists. Our "President" has replaced a greater Man<br/>a mouth that roars. I miss the former....and trust Obama to "do a right<br/>Thing".
While it would be edifying to see Mr. Obama live out retirement with the homespun selflessness of Gandhi, it's really none of my business. He's a private citizen who served his country.<br/><br/>I am far more concerned about the current president and his eponymous virtual cash deposit boxes around the world including one just blocks from the White House. Not a law in the books that says the Trump sons have to reject Vlad from Moscow booking a thousand hotel rooms for the next 100 years. And Mar-a-Lago memberships are just a web application away.
One rule for the Dems, another for the GOP. This is plain.<br/>One never sees this kind of article about the GOP.  The GOP is supposed to be money grubbing ethics challenged parasites, so it is always OK for them.<br/>The Dems are supposed to live under the rules the GOP makes for them, the ones outlined in this article here.<br/>Then, in the end, America's voters choose the GOP.<br/>What a crock.
Apparently the NYT buys that Obama is "a man whose historic candidacy was premised on a moral examination of politics."<br/><br/>I don't.  
The Democratic party is in such a sad state of corruption. It didn't need this too...<br/><br/>Just look at the appalling transcripts from the DNC election fraud lawsuit. <br/><br/><a href="https://mysprint.sprint.com/mysprint/pages/secure/myaccount/landingPage.jsp?_requestid=5190" title="https://mysprint.sprint.com/mysprint/pages/secure/myaccount/landingPage.jsp?_requestid=5190" target="_blank">https://mysprint.sprint.com/mysprint/pages/secure/myaccount/landingPage....</a><br/><br/>P.S.<br/>I would like to see some coverage on this topic in the NY Times please.
It's elitist attitudes like this that encourage people to vote for Trump. Obama is a rock star. It's not a character flaw to cash in. <br/><br/>Get off your high horse, Times.
Democratism is the new communism. All of the smart Americans have figured that out. As the Democratic Party implodes around Obama, he's going to take what he can get.
It is hard to get by on a mere 65 million dollars.   Windsurfing with Billionaire Branson, 9 BR mansion, kids in private school, Haahvaad tuition due soon.  $400K per speech, one hours of work equaling 12 years of income for average family...sounds fair to me.<br/><br/>Show me a liberal, and I will show you a hypocrite!
Dear subscription-greedy NYT,<br/><br/>Matthew 7: 3-4<br/>“[3] Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother’s eye and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye?<br/>[4] How can you say to your brother, ‘Let me take the speck out of your eye,’ when all the time there is a plank in your own eye?"<br/><br/>A person who has dignified a high office for eight long years, and commands respect even afterwards, is, imho, entitled to seek out his own 'subscriptions'.<br/><br/>Criticise him if you must, by all means do; but, only when your own 'vaunted' content is available to one and all in Open Access mode. Until then, imho, you possess no moral authority to judge the monetary activities of august personages.<br/><br/>Auf wiedersehen,<br/><br/>Chuck<br/>[subscribed to NYT by the month, every month, for as long as I remember, yet nary a crib about it]
He's just another corrupt, hypocritical liberal. The Democratic Party is full of these people, and it's why they lost the last election.
I will tell my kids that if you work hard and become president  ,turn your head and let Wall Street Banksters steal trillions of taxpayer money and steal millions of their homes with fake mortgage documents  they will collect a huge bribe.....I mean  paycheck  when you are out of office.
Can you say Quid Pro Quo boys and girls?  That's right!
This piece is nothing but rank hypocrisy.<br/><br/>Exactly what does the New York Times Editorial Board, and the New York Times owners, think that the people who buy all the expensive stuff that their advertisers hawk in the pages and on the website of the New York TImes - The homes, the jewelry, the vacations, the clothes, the artwork, the restaurants - do to make their money?<br/><br/>Please. This is what all your cocktail and dinner party friends, your fellow guests at society galas, do in their "off hours" at work.<br/><br/>Before you so sanctimoniously (and anonymously) publish stuff like this, please take a look in the mirror.
This is such utter nonsense. There is an ongoing national emergency and this is what you deem necessary to write about? BTW...President Obama served his country while in office... not himself or his family. Now that he's out of office, he has every right to earn a living.
Shouldn't he and Michelle start a foundation to stop the murders in his home town of Chicago? And, what makes you think his is not going to lie in his new book.  Let's not forget, "If you like your Dr. , you can keep your Dr." "We made the Iran  deal with the moderates".
Just another "money-grubbing" politician.
There was nary a word of criticism from the Editorial Board about Hillary Clinton's feeding at the Wall Street trough during the campaign. <br/><br/>But when a black man does it, that's an outrage.<br/><br/>This article almost perfectly exemplifies the difficulty the Editorial Board has had understanding Obama.<br/><br/>To a certain type of Democrat, a black man must be either an Uncle Tom, ala Thomas or Carson, or he must be a MLK Jr.<br/><br/>The idea that he could be a center right, 1%, DINO, like Hillary, simply does not compute.<br/><br/>Meanwhile, the one person who did not accept money from Wall Street - Bernie Sanders - is not even mentioned.<br/><br/>Quite the contrary. This paper spent the entire campaign lambasting Sanders with unending criticism.<br/><br/>The paper laments the fact that the Democratic party is out of touch with the working class.<br/><br/>Yes, it's difficult to maintain credibility with the working class when you hobnob with Wall Street, like Hillary and Obama.<br/><br/>But there is one person who was not out of touch with the working class - Bernie Sanders. <br/><br/>The NYT just can't stand it. 
President Obama put up with so much racist non sense when he was in office, he ought to take every cent Wall Street or any other street is willing to pay him.
I see no problem charging for speeches working with charities.<br/>This is a far cry from how Tony Blair conducted himself post office. Just imagine Obama offering consultancy services to shady Balkan and Middle East regimes!<br/>However speeches in all honor, now when they have time at their hands I am waiting for the Obamas to fulfil their promises towards the forgotten Nigerian school girls
Credit to the Obamas for transparency showing earned income and giving the NYT something to write about: an editorial unfavorable opinion at a time when the current president and his family are headed in the direction of secrecy. Leave the Obamas alone. 
For Obama -- or Hillary Clinton -- to accept speaking  fees from Wall Street is simply not the same as accepting money as a lobbyist to influence politicians.  Bernie Sanders tried to make it so but was not able to provide any evidence that the three speeches  Hillary delivered in 2014 as a private citizen had any influence on the Democratic platform in 2016. <br/><br/>I have a sneaky feeling progressive purists feel obliged to cry foul now about Obama's speaking fees because they raised Holy hell about Hillary's.<br/><br/>I'm also curious who blew the whistle on Obama...and why. Seems like another unnecessary distraction from the massive corruption we are witnessing in Washington.
This is going to complicate Barack's nomination to the Supreme Court.
You chastise President Obama for accepting a reported $400,000 payout for giving a speech to a Wall Street firm. However the New York Times promotes and pays a climate change denier (Bret Stephens) to espouse his wrong headed views in these very same opinion pages. I do not think the Times has any moral high ground on which to rebuke Mr. Obama.
There is much, much more about American values symbolized by this particular president's $400,000 speech fee that needs to be analyzed and discussed. For one example, put it in the context of "Christian values." Bring some others into the discussion. Like evangelical leaders who have amassed personal fortunes preaching the "prosperity gospel" to the poor and the poor of spirit, or built "Christian" media empires and megachurches with palatial homes and private jets for themselves while they admonish lonely widows living on Social Security to send their widow's mite to the "mission" and be "blessed." Ask Americans working two jobs for minimum wage with no health insurance why they still believe the federal estate tax should be repealed so that Donald Trump's children won't have to pay a penny of tax on the millions they will receive for doing nothing but being born to a wealthy father. Wealth, get as a much as you can, by any means, as quickly and easily as you can, and fight to keep it all because you have "earned" it, your "loser" and "taker" fellow man be damned, is what passes for virtue in capitalist, materialist America. Let's have a discussion about that. I'll bet President Obama would be happy to lead it, maybe even for free.
Oh come on!! I have to strongly push back at this editorial. The United States is a capitalist and a market driven society. The price is what the market can afford. Is it the wish of the editorial board that the president and his family live in penury? What is with this attitude that any money made by a man with a good moral compass and ethical standards must be disparaged and viewed with disdain? Please just stop it. I bet you the current bumbling president would tell you to get lost and call you many horrible names amongst which would be the failing fake news communist New York Times fish wrapper. I see nothing wrong with the president getting paid big for his speeches. I cannot wait to read his books. I especially want to see what he has to say about his capitulating so much to the republicans who were only interested in ruining his presidency. I want to know why the lack of a backbone on so many occasions in his first term. I want to know if he regretted not reading the riot act to Joe Lieberman and getting us the public option. I can't wait to read his books.
I guess Obama shouldn't capitalize on his time in the White House.  Taking a hefty fee (nice work if you can get it) from a bunch of Wall Street Execs somehow becomes a betrayal of his message?  When did he stop speaking on behalf of the public?  Does acceptance of the money somehow lessen the impact of the speech?  He's been pilloried by the Right since his campaign started.  He and  Michelle have shown tremendous grace in how they responded to the horrible attacks from all sides.  Now he's a private citizen, he's still working to further the goals he's set for himself, and he has a chance to earn some money besides.  You're offended by this?  In your warped view of public service, Obama should always wear the hair shirt of poverty.  Get real.  For at least 8 years, the man was the ideal of what a public servant should be: focused on doing the right thing, being a strong leader, and at the same time being a pretty cool guy.  When you editors donate the bulk of your probably hefty paychecks to charitable causes, maybe then you've earned the right to criticize.  Until then, climb down off those high horses and focus your energy on more important issues.  Like the thieving orange clown currently occupying the White House.
Weighted NYT Editorial/News Scoreboard:<br/><br/>Right of Bernie and his supporters to a fair shot at the nomination: 0<br/><br/>Harping on Hillary's emails in the face of Trump candidacy:             0<br/><br/>Covering a horrid Trump campaign primarily with insult:                  0<br/><br/>Hiring the likes of Bret Stephens by compensation:                         0<br/><br/>Waiting to see how a very decent Obama handles speaking fee:      0                            <br/><br/>SCORING GUIDE: 0/5  You lose. Fire senior editors. Hire new ones.          <br/><br/>{Note: 5/5  =  the gold ring. For the paper, the country and the world.}
All the comments finding nothing wrong with President Obama's cashing in, and the many readers who "liked" those comments, should take some time and read Barbara Tuchman's excellent history of the run up to WWI, "The Proud Tower." <br/><br/>Then as now, it is the bourgeoise who always make excuses for the excesses of the wealthy and powerful because they are terrified of identifying with the poor and dispossessed meanwhile everyone becomes less stable as the screws tighten, as we see with the election of President Trump.<br/><br/>If most of the readers here cannot see how dangerous a moment in history we now live in, shame on them.
How do the NYT and other critics know what Obama plans to DO with the money? Isn't that the legitimate question?
It's okay if you're Obama.
Obama's (and the Clintons before him) is hurting a great deal on multiple fronts:<br/>- It shows complete hypocrisy (he advised the "young" and the "high-spirited" to go into public life, while cashing out on it not-s--secretly;<br/>- He has shown once again that there is no party for the middle and lower-class in this country; on the contrary, the Republicrats are cashing out like bandits. ($400K for a 45-min speech? the 99.9% spend YEARS making that much);<br/>- He has proven to all that the end justifies the means, and the money is the only worthy goal.<br/>Tell my 19 y.o. that he should be a democrat after this. Yes - he is young and idealistic, which is great at his age. Guess what? he has just become completely disillusioned thanks to Obama's greedy move. That's why the public abandons the "d"s in droves. At least the "R"s do not pretend...
power corrupts .... how may steaks can you eat a day.. how many ball gowns can you wear at once?... the Rockefellers, the Roosevelts, the Kennedy's.. (though to the manor born) left a legacy of public service that the Obamas and the Clintons can't ever hope to match ... hopefully others will come along who will not disappoint by slurping at the table of the  1% because they were lucky enough to live in the presidential palace for far too long...  Jimmy Carter is revered by many for a reason.. others, not so much
Obama.....grace and elegance and empathy vs Trump...workaday vulgarity!  Imagine ... we have a president who actually works just like the "deplorables" who make up most of the country.  We have a "real" person not a plastic "ken doll" leading the country.  Obama was and is a fraud!
Can I assume your real outrage is that Clinton didn't get paid 80% of what a white male expects to get paid, and Obama didn't get paid 1/2   1/2 × 3/5 of what a white male expects to get paid?
Alas - Obama is just like everyone else - greedy!
You fail to point out the sitting president runs a pay for play scam at his golf resorts a couple of times a week for amounts that dwarf Obama's speech compensation.  
If Barack will show up and stokes the fires of resistance, I don't think progressives will begrudge him the money. But, If he turns into a suck-up, millions will be more than disappointed.
How Americans can put up with such widespread corruption from the President on down to the former President and the would-be President is beyond me. Then they go to Mexico on vacation and get upset about having to pay a $20 bribe to get out of a ticket and complain how corrupt México is!
Let us not pretend the that the clothes make the man.  He is a liar and he committed those many lies mostly upon, as he wishes to portray it, "...the people that I’d entered public life to serve.”  Additionally, his inability to lead shipwrecked this nation and the world, and now it's up to President Trump to carefully yet boldly dislodge the country from its dangerous circumstance.  He was not a moral leader, somehow navigating the nation into a more perfect union.  Moreover, his lethal relations with Iran will haunt this nation and the world for many generations to come.  All in all, here is a man who has a gift to communicate.  I'd much rather someone who is less floral, less able to persuade with his words, but more honest, harder working, and not schooled in the way of Washington which is to serve the elites and the country be damned.  
From the article:  " the Obamas brought grace, empathy and high standards to their time in the White House.."<br/>-----<br/><br/>Sorry, but anyone who truly believes that the hyper-partisan, divisive, lying and fundamentally corrupt Obama administration is an example of "grace, empathy and high standards" then no wonder you were all blind-sided by the election results.  Fools.
He's a private citizen now. He's not obligated to anyone except for himself and his family. Did Obama make taxpayers pony up millions of dollars so his wife and daughters could live in a penthouse in NYC? Did Obama refuse to release his tax returns? Did Obama profit off the presidency by making deals with overseas developers and encouraging diplomats to stay at his "luxury" hotels? Did Obama incite violence at his campaign rallies? Did Obama constantly make racist, sexist remarks? Was Obama set to go to trial for rape when he was elected? Did Obama throw the country into total chaos by releasing a half-baked Muslim, I mean, travel ban? Did he try to pass a health care bill that would cause 20 million people to lose coverage? Did he accuse the former president of spying on him and then offer no evidence for the claim? Did he bully and alienate key allies? Did he hire white nationalists to top positions? Did he attack the press on a daily basis? Did he put corporate interests ahead of public health by giving mining companies free reign to pollute waterways? Were he and his team under investigation for colluding with the Russian government to swing the election?<br/><br/>Please keep your eye on the ball, NYTimes. This op-ed is embarrassing and disheartening. 
Saint Reagan got a million bucks for his first speech, but that's okay for white republicans!
Shall we analyze how this newspaper gets its revenue, the ads, etc?
despite all the excuses....it still smells
Shouldn't NYTimes be more interested to share with their readers what Pres Obama said to the banks and not how much he was paid?
Ah, Barack, a man of the people.  I would expect nothing less from our former Dear Leader, who just wants to spread the wealth around...and into his pocket.
The Obamas WERE great. Now, they are just two more millionaires.
Why couldn't Obama set a higher standard?  Could it be that it's because he's a hypocritical, avaricious creep -- which the Times is only now finding out?
"eloquent man of the people we fell in love with"  LOL (and yes, I was!)  You leftists would be more entertaining if you weren't so damaging to our country!  Take your blinders off and maybe you would see the truth of not just Barack Obama, but your entire leftist philosophy!
Seriously NYT?  The 45th President, a habitual liar and wanna be dictator, has invited an actual dictator and killer to the While House and you are worried about how much a former president is paid for giving a speech?  I think there are more important issues to focus on.
All you people fawned and swoon when Obama was lecturing the country about, "share the wealth.....  when have you made enough money...bashing Wall Street... etc"  Now you all defend him.   Pathetic. 
Sorry, NYT. What you are seeing is the true Obama. It seems your Almighty has feet of clay.  Expect to see more huge speaking fees for him and Michelle. Mega book deals for years to come as he tries to burnish his failing legacy. His hubris would not allow him to accept less for his "precious" thoughts.
President Obama shoukd take the money and donate every penny to causes fighting the abuse on Wall Street and the remaiing fallout from the 2007 financial crisis.
Liberals are just now discovering that he is a selfish arrogant greedy hypocrite?
'Listen here black man, see how badly it turned out for that woman went for Wall Street money?  Leave those high-dollar speaking fees to white men and know your place' suggests the paper of record. 
So The Times is going to parrot the Repub meme that it's somehow dirty when a DEMOCRAT makes money?<br/><br/>How stupid are you people over there?  Do you feel dirty when you cash your paychecks?  This is how every president makes money after leaving office, and quite frankly there's NOTHING WRONG with it.<br/><br/>If someone would pay me big bucks to flap my lips for an hour, I'd jump right on it.
You write “... have the audacity to hope he’ll set a higher standard for past presidents.“<br/>Mr. Obama set a higher standard when he was in Office and also gave a whole lot of $$$ to charities. All public knowledge. I do not even know why you are writing such an editorial.<br/>Keep on writing about the Grifter. Liar and Crook in Chief; he deserves all the attention and maybe, just maybe he will go away with shame (well earned) attached to his name.
NY Times editorial writers should have looked at the Washington Post comment section regarding Ruth Marcus' editorial on the same subject. Obama being a black man has nothing to do with these seasoned observers of the Republic telling him how to conduct his affairs. No, these editorial writers simply want to see a change in how former presidents conduct their finances. Yes, that's certainly the answer. 
Give me a break! Trump, his greed mongering family and cronies are pretty much selling fake Louise Vuitton luggage that fell off a truck out of the front door of the White House.....and you want to beat up on the most honest President we have had in decades?
Just for reference -- the NYT CEO's annual salary is $3M<br/><br/>(<a href="http://finance.yahoo.com/quote/NYT/profile?p=NYT)" title="http://finance.yahoo.com/quote/NYT/profile?p=NYT)" target="_blank">http://finance.yahoo.com/quote/NYT/profile?p=NYT)</a>
I'm with WalterHett, below.....what an embarrassing stock response, remarkable for its lack of nuance.  Seems to me that Barack, as usual, is a bunch of steps ahead of everybody.  How do you know where that money will go?  Maybe Barack -- unlike 99% of the so-called resistance -- has a plan.  The Times is in jeopardy of sounding old and white and tired when it begins to churn out specious morality pieces.
Obama is no different from his predecessor, not any diferent from either Clinton.<br/>He is a self proclaimed Conservative Democrat and a Blue DOg. He worked hand in glove with and for coal companies before his election and pushed the worse then  useless "clean coal" concept. As a lawyer, Obama is willing to take any position and to defend it until he's paid more by someone else to take the oppositie side.<br/>The election of this man was the desire by a large portion of the electorate to get Martin Luther King Jr. , John and Robert Kennedy and Ronald Reagan all in one man. Basically they got each of them-just all on different days. Obama knew nothing when he began his terms-no different from Mr Trump- The only difference was that Obama can actually read.<br/>    Obama proved that one very important recent  American ideal  is true:  anything a white person can screw up and ruin, a person of color can make an equal mess of. I do not mean to criticise the man: but I feared his accession would result in a whole lot of happy nothing back in '08. It now appears he will leave absolutely nothing since,(like DT), all his actions were executive orders, not laws.
This is preposterous.  The Con Don and his Robber Baron buddies are in the process of rewriting American rules to further enrich themselves - through his appointments to the cabinet and regulatory agencies as well as OUR United States government - and he is raking in the dough daily with his "commercial" activities.  The Con Don got over $1 million for speeches before the Robber Barons put him in OUR White House.  And THIS is what the New York Times editorial covers?  Preposterous.<br/><br/>Rupert Murdoch and his Robber Baron buddies at Blackstone are right now trying to take over Tribune Media so they can control even more minds with their hate-anger-fear LIES, LIES LIES.  And THIS is news?  Preposterous.<br/><br/>No.  Stupid.<br/><br/>But WE - THE AMERICAN PEOPLE are not.  <br/><br/>Please, ladies and gentlemen of the media, keep your eyes on the ball and keep us informed as OUR United States of America is reduced daily to a mafia-controlled wonderland for the insatiably greedy.  It's the least you can do.  Why wait for more world-destroying HIStory? <br/><br/>YOU GO, PRESIDENT OBAMA!  Get as much as you can while you can.  It's the American way. 
thank you for this editorial. Your use of Obamas own words is particularly powerful and I hope-to use another of his words-that he reflects on your advice and takes it.<br/>His appeal to millions of Americans was partly based on the fact that he spent a great part of his life living and working with working and poor people. Now he has spent eight years in a political and security bubble. We need him to reject the jet-setting, Davos, Jackson Hole lifestyle and reconnect with the average Americans he has so well represented in his work and his family. 
If someone wants to pay him 400k to wax poetic about political theory, there is nothing wrong with that.   Despite efforts to the contrary, we live in a capitalistic society.   Poor people can donate very little to charity, only people with money actually can.  I don't doubt that he will support efforts and causes that are noteworthy.   That being said, the real issue are the people that thought that he was some incarnation of Ghandi, when the reality was, he's merely a brilliant politician.  America has got to stop trying to make gods out of leaders, and instead merely demand competency. 
On one hand arguments can be made (many of them correct) that Obama giving this speech is just fine, or even a good thing. On the other hand, public perception is important; by that metric giving this speech is a misstep. Particularly since his first public speech post-presidency is likely to generate inordinate attention.  I greatly admire Barack Obama, but this seems like a very poor decision.
I am a big fan of President Obama.  That said, I am sad to learn of his accepting $400K to speak before a group of investment bankers, even if it is about health care.  I doubt that he needs the money and he ruins his credibility as an unselfish ex-president by doing this.  I don't have a problem with him speaking to the investment bankers and charging them a fee in the form of a donation in his name to a charity.   I would feel better if he would donate the $400K to charity after the speech.  I would feel even better if he directed the  payment to a charity without it touching his bank account.  I don't understand why he is doing this.
I have no problem with this. No one's forcing any organization to pay this fee. And as other's have noted, the Obama's philanthropic organization does good works. I'm thrilled for them to have this money instead of a wall street firm.
Money is an abstraction of different kinds of value - it can be instrumental (representing the hope to exchange present for greater value in the future), but the exchange of money can also represent social, cultural, or moral value.<br/><br/>Accepting payment requires a case-by-case evaluation of the intent of the giver and context of the recipient.  And donors can be educated about context beyond their experience as a requirement of their participation.<br/><br/>Every exchange of money is not an ethical failure, and it's uninformed to view it that way.  <br/><br/>To paraphrase Zizek, you don't have a problem with Barack Obama, you have a problem with capitalism.
By all accounts, given the tremendous roadblocks placed before him, President Obama performed admirably during his time in the White House.  His mere acknowledgment that the country continues to exhibit a severe empathy added a fresh and morally sound perspective to policy making.  <br/><br/>On one hand, I cannot become too upset with President Obama for accepting the market rate for sharing his thoughts to an audience that has plenty of money to spare.  However, on the other hand, because of the collective talents of President Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama (who regularly exhibited her intelligence, grace, class and humility during her tenure), their family is well positioned to remain members of the financial elite well into the future.  Does President Obama truly need another $400,000 to provide his services? <br/><br/>One should not become President of the United States in order to become wealthy.  No, I would hope that the goal of all Presidents (and Presidential candidates) would be to take every action possible to improve the lives of the general populace.  <br/><br/>Given the efforts of the current occupants of the White House, $400,000 could go a long way towards assisting organization(s) in preserving American ideals and striving towards bringing financial security to all Americans.  
There is an old story about a very successful Japanese painter from the 17th century,  I believe. He charged so much for his work that the wealthy feudal landowners and Samurai clients despised him but bought anyway because the painter was so in vogue.  A terrible reputation began to follow the painter everywhere he went to sell his work.<br/>He became a hated artist for his greedy ways. But late in his old age the story unfolded that the real reason he charged the rich so much was so that he could buy rice for the poorest of peasants living in squalor in his home province. He spent all his money taking care of them.
I do believe we live in a capitalist society where one is allowed to be compensated for his work.  The free market determines that price.  I'm hardly upset that President Obama is a valued speaker.  I might argue that he is being underpaid.  After all movie stars, sports stars, CEO's of failing companies often are paid even more.  If our society feels that the sum is too much perhaps we should raise taxes on those high income earners, as President Obama suggested.  I am sure he would be very happy to pay and release his tax return, unlike the current White House occupant.
The issue with Hillary Clinton's Goldman Sachs speech, as I recall it, was with the content of the speech, which she refused to reveal to the public. One would hope that Barack Obama would have the good sense to release a transcript of his speech. If the terms of agreement with his audience do not allow that, he should not accept the money.
It's amusing to see the same people who would have undoubtedly lambasted a Republican now do cartwheels to defend this as something he "deserves". But let's be clear: this is not "tone deafness". Even that is a type of manufactured excuse. Obama knows precisely how it looks. He knows how it runs counter to everything he based his political capital on over the last 8 years, and how hypocritical it should rightfully appear. And he still took the money. People might ponder the old adage: "Watch what I do, not what I say" as they feel the urge to defend the free market on a case-by-case basis. Indeed, the "audacity" continues.
As you did  during the Republican primary, you lend credence to the moral disaster that is Trump by asking questions of others.  <br/><br/>Just as during the Clinton campaign.<br/><br/>You're worried about untoward influence on a no-longer sitting President?<br/><br/>When the same evil, or elitist, or too-businessy people who paid Obama pay EVERY super-star speaker to Wall Street, even those on the raggedy fringes of the reddest Right, the same fees ?<br/><br/>When Trump makes plain his intent to harm the middle and lower classes to benefit the Wall Street Rich?<br/><br/>When you witness this sitting President, during the campaign:<br/><br/>a) politically destroy opponents by repeating calumny against their patriotism and character for associating in with Wall Street<br/><br/>b) seriously attack the Clinton's foundation, one of the nation's best, because they accepted speaking fees from Wall Street and elsewhere<br/><br/>c) rouse his reality-challenged followers to near violence, and instill lasting contempt for the institutions of civil society, because of dealings of Wall Street<br/><br/>d) then turn around and hand actual power to, who?  Wall Street?  Yes!<br/><br/>This is no 'Everybody else does it' apology.  This is 'Pay attention to what matters'.  <br/><br/>Who sold the people down the swamp to benefit Goldman Sachs?  Who brought Goldman Sachs on board to write policy for its own benefit?<br/><br/>Trump is doing harm to the country and its people.  He invited Wall Street to light the bonfire.<br/><br/>The optics for Mr. Obama could be better.  But they're just optics.
we don't yet know whether Obama will keep the fee or donate to charity or his foundation or library.  We do know that Cantor Fitzgerald staff was devastated on 9/11. Perhaps this is speech will pay homage to the firm's casualties.  Oratory is Obama's gift.  We will see how he chooses to share his eloquence. 
No one is suggesting he does not have the right to do this.  It is just that if the Dems were to learn anything from having "the most qualified ever" lose to a clown then they would see the optics of this hurts their chances of winning back those who switched from them to Trump.
Contrary to right-wing delusions, President Obama is not a Communist, or a Socialist, or an economic Populist. He is, and governed as, a slightly right-of-center Eisenhower Republican, who somehow believes in corporate "free trade" and has too much faith in the unbridled marketplace. That he's reaping big fees for speaking to Wall Street is no big surprise. He surrounded himself with Wall Street types when he was President.
Almost all politicians, by the very nature of their job, are corrupt. It's simply a matter of how corrupt.
Reading the comments, it seems like after the failure of HRC, many Democrats are less than willing to hear any criticism of  Obama.  The pain of Trump's election is still too fresh.
What a lovely article regarding the President that made it his priority to politize nearly every part of the federal government.  The Democrats used to be a party to be proud of. They have become everything they claim to despise.
I see so many people saying that Obama is being held to a higher standard. How so? Both Clintons have been raked over the coals for their choices in this regard, Carter has always been admired for his integrity--and his choices in this matter contribute to that. Whether or not there is anything inherently wrong with highly paid corporate speeches, they are deeply symbolic and appearances matter.<br/><br/>Obama is the standard bearer of the democratic party, and it is disingenuous to say he is merely a private citizen even if that is true in a technical sense. I don't think anyone begrudges the Obamas making booko bucks; nobody is complaining about their  far more lucrative book deals, and rightly so. But how they make that money does matter.
The goal of many Americans, as shown by the Clintons, is to rise above the crowd and literally into and above the clouds...on corporate style jets, at five star hotels, limos waiting, lavish meals always being prepared and absolutely no worries about all of this, and much more, will be paid for. The "big payoff" in our country is now so big that it would have been unimaginable to all but the smallest portion of prior generations...but now, with private jets, worldwide  travel and endless technology available, exceeds anything of which ancient kings and queens might have had in their dreams.<br/><br/>If you want to play in those leagues, you've got to have the means. Obama had eight years of living at the top, why stop now? He can live out his days without the worries and heavy responsibilities of the presidency AND enjoy a similar lifestyle. All the fun, none of the headaches.<br/><br/>How much is enough? America's billionaire class has the answer: there is never too much. 65 million after taxes? That's a good start. Trump, claiming to be a billionaire himself, gladly, eagerly accepted $400,000 per episode for his "Your fired!" television program.<br/><br/>Once you get more than any human can ever spend, what do you want? Apparently, it is only more, more, more. Yes, it is wrong to cash in so completely and blatantly, but they are merely following the practices of America's "captains of industry" in seeking everything...then more. We expected better of him and his wife, but we live and learn.
Why not soak Wall Street for as much as he can get? They're paying him to give a speech that will undoubtedly go against the grain of the audience. It won't be a pep talk to go out and sell, sell, sell. The Obama's wealth will not be used to buy  a million dollar yacht. They will be able to support worthwhile causes. - with the money of Wall Street wealthy. He and Michelle sacrificed millions in income during Barack's years of selfless public service. It's particularly annoying that he gets grief for this at the same time that a sitting president is using his office for personal gain in the most audacious way.<br/><br/> I know, the Times is trying to look fair and balanced, but this is the same thinking that hyped HRC's email server investigation while Trump got much less condemnation for much greater sins. And this criticism of Obama is not even the idealist point of view because taking money from Wall Street to fund worthy causes is, IMO, more effective in advancing ideals than trying to be a symbol of piety.
"Pathbreaking figure"? "It shows a shows a surprising tone deafness"? You still can't see it, can you? We're living in the era of Trump because of the abject failure of Obama on so many fronts. From his 'pen and phone' in driving extreme government overreach to his cynical treatment of social issues, like urban decay, fueled the rise of outrage against the ruling class. Obama created the environment which permitted the rise of Trump. He now gets to collect his cash and enjoy his retirement while the rest of us ... well you get the picture. 
These speeches are a payoff for policies during his administration. For example, for keeping bankers out of jail after the financial crisis. Hey, if Hillary could make millions why shouldn't he.
Two points:<br/>Harry Truman wrote in his memoirs, that many lucrative offers were made to him after he left office. He refused them because he felt that it was wrong to cash in om the Office of the Presidency. He, by the way, died with no assets except for his house. THAT was a Democratic President!!<br/><br/>Speaking of Democrats, their sanctimonious, breathtaking hypocrisy, in which they speak like democratic  socialists, but earn and live  like hedge fund managers does not go unnoticed by much of the population. 
If President Obama is able to receive 400k to speak to Wall Street, by all means, let him speak. He's not running for office. There are no conflicts of interest. Given the disastrous state of our country under the most terrifying president we'll ever experience, this is wasted space. Please focus your attention on the real problems at hand: healthcare that leaves out 20 million people; plundering our educational system with for-profit schools; environmental suicide; the GDP floundering; a tax bill that gives the 1% even more breaks. Oh, and that little matter with Russia. 
Bottom line for Democrats: It's perfectly okay when a man takes $400,000 for merely talking to a group of mostly men from the financial industry, even better if it is a black man. Just don't let the proven smart, highly credentialed and qualified older white woman in that venue for the same pay - actually less, but whose counting. ;-)
The Cleveland Indians signed Edwin Encarnacion to a 3-year, $60 million contract. He is batting .200 and I have lost track of the strikeouts and hitting into double plays. .. Not so bothered by the Obamas cashing in: they gave up a lot, they gave a lot; and I think they will do better than .200. 
Don't expect Democrats to have any problem with this.  You're acting like principles were ever driving anyone.  Just to be clear -- they weren't.<br/><br/>Democrats are about will to power.  No rules.  No principles.  Get power, maintain power, increase power.  It's about winning, period.<br/><br/>No Democrat has any problem with Obama cashing in.  It's de rigueur.
Nothing new here, the 'do as I say, not as I do' in politics is alive and well, save the current the 'vulgar of the current occupants' of the White House as the NYT so nicely put it. Way to keep it so classy. I very much doubt Trump will ask for speaking fees once he is retired. 
I tried to find the text for this speech to see what he actually said. No luck. Without seeing the words I refuse to judge whether or not O has sold out. If he asked folks to buy Malia's new line of strappy  sandals and stay at Obama Caribbean Resorts it would be reason  to get my chonnies in a bind. If he told Wall Street to behave in the interest of the middle class that would be something else. 
All of the Democratic loyalists on this comment page using the Republican Party a their excuse for mass corruption show why the Democratic Party can't win more than a third of elections.<br/>We already have a Greedy Oligarchy Party. A second one is redundant.<br/>If you don't want the country to move right, you have to push to the left, and, unlike the right, the left demands honesty and integrity.<br/>"We only steal a little" is a bad campaign slogan.<br/>When the Democrats are honestly fighting for freedom and justice the people will rise up behind you. As long as you keep making excuses to be the lesser evil, this country is moving toward third world status.
"At some point, you've made enough money"<br/><br/>Guess not. I would've expected Obama to be aware of the optics on this, and to have gotten ahead of it from the start by announcing any $$ paid will go to a charity. Everyone knows they're getting $65 million for books, which is outrageous.
It is a bribe.  Not of President Obama specifically, but of all future leaders who know that if they take care of Wall Street, Wall Street will take care of them.  
How about, for once, we stop whaling on good people when they do something that doesn't align with our sense of perfection? And stop giving bad people a pass because they're so bad we don't expect any better?<br/><br/>Barack Obama isn't perfect by any means, but he endured eight years of outrageous slander and deliberate sabotage of his efforts. He did a good job as President (in ways that are now thrown into stark contrast with the current occupant.) He did a difficult job well, to little applause and much heckling, during what for most people would be their earning years.<br/><br/>Get off his back already.
Perhaps if more attention was paid to what the Democratic Party really does, to what the Clinton Foundation really does, to what Barack Obama really says.<br/>The Democratic Party has focused, I believe, on trying to level all the playing fields to some extent and to raising all the boats.  But they are seen as pandering to minorities and ignoring whites.  Because that is what gets written.<br/>Same with the Clintons; perhaps if more were written about the good the Foundation does and less about where the money that supports that foundation comes from they would not be perceived to be greedy.<br/>Why should Obama be the one to set the example of not cashing in on his experiences and insights?<br/>How about we stay focused on the real crimes emanating from the White House and stop the false equivalence?
$400,000 for a speech to Wall Street? That's it? 
If you wanted a leader who doesn't sell himself to wall street and other corporate influences you should've voted for Trump.<br/><br/>He is the first president worth more than most of the CEO's trying to influence him....... Good luck with that.
How much is Hillary getting these days? How about the ol' Clinton Foundation?<br/><br/>Obama is just getting as much as he can while he can. You never know when it's going to dry up. <br/><br/>It's downright hilarious to read the comments from those who are positive that Obama is going to do all sorts of wonderful things with the money and they also "know for a fact" that Trump is terrible in every way. <br/><br/>Maybe Obama will decide to donate to impoverished people whose family members were murdered in Chicago. Nah. It's not like he did anything for them the eight years he was in office. 
"Is it a betrayal of that sentiment for the former president to have accepted a reported $400,000 to speak to a Wall Street firm?" Strange Editorial. I wonder if this editorial is another effort by the Editorial Board to do the "Fair and Balanced" thing.<br/>Like you said, The Obamas are starting a foundation whose work will include “training and elevating a new generation of political leaders in America,” this take money.<br/>Money is not bad. Having money is not bad. It is what one does with money that is good or bad. And that discrimination is easy for people who have not been devoured by the ego monster.<br/>If it is good, it is good for everyone, not just a select few. If it is not good for everyone, it is bad. Let us see what the Obamas, and the Clintons as well, do with their very far from billions of dollars before we put them in the Koch bag.<br/>The glaring difference, which it apparently takes one to see one, is that the Obamas have hearts that are significantly more than the 4 chambered blood pumps that beat in the breast of Sheldon Adelson for example. 
I'm a little more worried about the Fruit Salad in office and the money he wants for his "wall".  
Why bother to hide the corruption anymore? The comments are ridiculous. The apologists are out in full force contorting the facts to fit their worldview. Hypocrisy is rampant. Obama was a liar and a fraud. This doesn't mean Trump isn't or the republicans aren't. But Mr. Obama and the democrats are obviously in it for the donor class. Not the rest of America. Good luck in 2018 you are gonna need it. 
this is funny... where was the moral outrage by the NYT editorial board for the paid speeches HRC did "in between" her last role as Sec State and her as a candidate for the highest office? At least Obama will no longer be directly involved in setting policy, as HRC was positioning herself to do.  Money has been a constant source of corruption in our society, and maybe we are experiencing another resurganve of its corrosive effects, something we should address, but to pin on Obama some kind of moral obligation not to earn a living to support his family is ridiculous.  as long as he pays his fair share of taxes.... now that is he most definitely a 1%er and all...funny how money changes peole alright, and our elected officials are nothing more (save for a few) salivating at "their chance" to cash in...
Why not speak for $400,000?    
What?!  Really?!<br/><br/>Did anyone expect anything different from the person that would drive off to make their golf 'tee-time' after, right after his brief and pathetic news conference where the beheading of an American Citizen was mentioned?!
Oh well, I have decided to let BO 44 be !<br/>He wants to make some money or whatever, his choice, his legacy,.<br/><br/>We need to focus more on 45 why is exploiting the Country costing us the taxpayers with his con game and bankrupting the Country. .<br/>Now NY is going to spend on Melania Trump who decided not to be with her Husband. 
It was widely believed (by at least 62 million Americans) that Obama could be on live TV holding a smoking gun in one hand and a heroin-filled syringe in the other, Michelle and a pile of dead kittens at his feet and the coverage would center on what she (and the kittens) had done to provoke him and how he was being unfairly treated because of his race. It isn't even worth questioning anything he does – he's Teflon and always has been.
I think this editorial is an attempt to look fair and unbiased. I would say to the editorial board that there is no unbiased reporting. There is right and wrong--there are gray areas, where discussion is needed. But to diss Barack Obama for collecting speaking fees--whoever gets the proceeds--is disingenuous. He no longer has government influence, he cannot present laws to Congress, his speeches are received with respect maybe but have force of law. This editorial makes the NYT look foolish. 
To all those who are whining about this editorial:<br/><br/>When he ran for president you loved his experience as a community organizer and now you love him for partying with the bankers? The fault does not lie in him but in all those who are rationalizing this populism-by-day-and-elitism- by- night ideology. When you ask why one should hold him above a higher standard, you have pretty much revealed a lot about your own standards: that you love the status quo and have fallen into the trap of defending mediocrity by pathologically comparing it to the worst scenario (current administration).<br/><br/>So, I ask again, what is preventing him from going back to his community organizing narrative?
Perhaps President Obama IS contribution his speaking fees to his foundation, or other charities.  I doubt the editorial board of the NYT knows.  
leave the guy alone. for eight yrs he was criticized for doing his job by racist members of congress mostly by republicans (remember its my job to make sure that Obama achieves nothing. look at the first 100 days of the trump admin.
Hypocrisy of an ideologue turned 1% on full display.
I do not begrudge Obama for making what the market will bear just like any pro athlete or businessman. Obama was there when the country desperately needed him. Where was the NYT and the WP when the country desperately needed them? The NYT and there WP could have helped much earlier by highlighting the inherent weakness of the democratic campaign while mercilessly pointing out the evils of Trump. Instead both MSM mainstays poked fun at Bernie and laughed at Agent Orange while crowning Hillary. 
As much as I admire and respect the Obamas, this editorial reflects the beliefs of millions of Americans who likely expected our former president to choose a higher road.  The suggestion here that speech revenues find their way into his foundation and other charities is excellent and should be seriously considered by the Obamas.  The contrast with Mr. Trump's ongoing financial exploitation of the office would be stark and send a powerful message that the highest ethical standards are necessary, important and expected of all current and former government leaders.
For those who wish Obama could provide some sorely missing moral leadership in this country, this moment is the very hinge point where the rubber hits the road. Many of the readers seem to take for granted that it's just fine to rake in money endlessly with no counterbalancing sense of responsibility to the health and well-being of the working people who make the system work at all. The wildly self-serving belief in unbridled capitalism is what is bringing climate warming, increasing the wealth chasm between the rich and the poor, and will soon bring this divided country to a standstill. Obama has paid some very hard dues, yes. He may earn a lot and he may do good or bad things with his money. That remains to be seen. Jimmy Carter has done great things as a former president and is a shining moral example. We are sorely in need of others. There have to be limitations on capitalism - this is why we need moral leaders, people with principles, to show how to correct the imbalances of the system by their choices in life. The present system allows people to remain greedy children without responsibility for others. The current political scene is clear evidence that we have run amok.
Why is it only a problem when Democrats make money? It's not as if he's suddenly operating a coal mine. Once again we see the double standard that has given us Trump and his merry band of corrupt billionaires. <br/><br/>Wall street isn't going away, sorry Bernie, and if we're ever going to get out of this mess, we need them on board, —or maybe he should just concede the field to Trump all together.<br/><br/>I also would not be surprised if the $400k is for audiences that can afford it — and that he'll be doing a lot of free speaking in front of other groups.
What is the topic of the speech?  I think that it's unfair to judge the former president on the mere acceptance of the offer to make a speech without knowing what the speech addresses and how it may or may not impact those who will attend.  
Obama is accepting money that he has earned, not much different from anyone who has achieved fame. What about all the Hollywood stars who accept larger and larger amounts as their fame increases. How do we know how he will use that money. Knowing him and his values, much of his wealth will undoubtedly be used for worthy causes. He deserves every penny he can garner.
How much Obama got paid for his speech is secondary to the content of the speech.  Unfortunately there does not seem to be a transcript and  I have seen no discussion about the content.  In my opinion Obama served us well...I hope that his speech included a few good jabs at the industry.   
I agree with every word of the editorial. Reputedly Americans are angry at the huge wealth of the 1%, compared to a disappearing middle income class that is swelling tide of the poor and destitute. Yet a large majority of the commenters here don't see anything wrong with their former president being aggrandized with extravagant corporate wealth.  A majority are still mesmerized with the good ol' American Dream of being part of that 1% themselves. I'm afraid this proves the old saying that people get the government they deserve —in this case, one where politicians talk down on corporate wealth when they want to get elected, but take it with both hands outside office.  Their principles then are a suit they wear to work, not something they live day to day in their personal lives. This defines hypocrisy. More specifically, the Obama administration was much criticized for stocking government positions with former Goldman Sachs employees at a time when banks had thrown the economy into deep peril by corrupt practices. A president doesn't need to take a job at a bank to enjoy the revolving door between politics and corporations.  $400,000 for a speech is a cozy enough arrangement.  Let's face it, Obama had a double side to him, one that was humanitarian and liberal, another that was allied to the rich, militarily a hawk and oppressive towards whistle-blowers. One that was principled and another that was not.
I'm reminded how we tend to place our Democratic leaders, current and ex, at higher standards than their Republican counterparts. Would we care if Pres. Bush or a future ex-Pres. Trump did this? Ex-president Obama needs to be at a higher standard, but our current president's business business activity is generally tolerated. Not only is Pres. Obama punished for accepting a fee, he needs to somehow justify it, either through setting up a foundation or donating it. When Reagan left office, he made $1 million in a speech to Japan...nobody found fault in that.
What most of the comments miss is that Cantor doesn't just give away $400,000 any more than Goldman just gave $250,000 to Hillary (per speech). Wall Street expects something for its money - influence and access. It's corrosive. It makes Obama look just like the people he used to rail against.
No conflict here. All ex-Presidents took speaking fees. He is no longer President. Also, all ex-Presidents took speaking fees. He was not rich before his administration, unlike the Bush family and the Kennedy's. He did not use the presidency to enrich himself, unlike the present occupation and his family. Is he to remain in the shadows and not take advantage of this great capitalistic society we have? He has much to say and many people wish him to remain relevant. If his product is worth the money then I see no reason why he shouldn't avail himself of its worth.  I feel confident he and Michelle will continue to promote projects that will be beneficial to the general public. Don't tear down someone who has been an exemplary President in my view. 
If I had an extra $40,000 laying around, I'd gladly give it to President Obama for a few hours of his time. Alas, I don't. I suspect the Wall Street firm that has the money will get what they pay for. And  so will we, in a roundabout way. I have great confidence in what he will say to Wall Street.
I find the idea that Obama not taking the money will provide a standard to be quaint.  We had the scandal free Obama Administration with high ethical standards. Did that provide a standard for the Trump Administration which simply proclaims they are above the law allied with the GOP which shows no interest in investigating potentially treasonous actions and violations of the Emoluments clause?  Perspective, gentlemen, perspective.
I am really struggling to understand why is Obama charging 400k for a speaking gig at an event organised by Wall Street is attracting so much attention and criticism.  Let's be clear, no one is really saying Obama did anything legally wrong or even accusing him of lobbying or doing favors for Wall Street.  They are saying it is perceptionally unacceptable for Obama to be seen taking money from Wall Street.  Quite simply, it's bad for his brand of politics and the Democrats.<br/>But, is this all it takes to erase all the things Obama has done in his eight years as President?  A scandal free Presidency?<br/>Based on most of the comments I read here and in other medias, it seems a huge majority of us do not see it as anything wrong, perceptionally or not.<br/>So, who are the people who have been critical of this?<br/>A). Foxnews, Big Rush and Trump fans.<br/>B).  The Warrens and Sanders who are still running for office.<br/>C).  The media, who like Wall Street, simply will not miss a great opportunity to profit from the OBAMA brand.<br/>Well, at least Wall Street paid Obama a fair price of 400k for using his name and presence.  The media paid nothing.
Maybe the object lesson here is that a Wall Street firm is so concerned with the impact of health care on the US that they were willing to pay nearly half a million dollars to have the one person who was at the epicenter of the biggest shift in US health care shift come and give his insight....<br/><br/>A person who - lest we forget - is not running for any office and whose power they cannot sway with campaign contributions.
There's no conflict of interest because he's no longer president. It's fine with me if Wall Street wants to give him $400K. More money in his coffers to donate to future Dem candidates. 
With this speech, Obama brings down the Democrat's midterm votes by several percentage points and Republicans win. This is, of course, why HRC lost. Bring back Bernie and Jimmy c.
I couldn't agree more.  He should not go the Clintons' path.  He should learn that it taints him.  It looks gross, money-grubbing, and lumps him with politicians that are greedy and beholden to moneyed special interets.  His book deal gives him more than enough money to live comfortably the rest of his life without earning another penny.  
If President Obama were to give the $ 400,000 to charity then it<br/>would be wonderful, and perhaps he does.<br/><br/>In that case let him make a three speeches a day to Wall Street and<br/>the 1%.<br/><br/>Harry Truman had less than $ 15,000 in savings when he returned<br/>to Private Life. I believe he refused to take money for speeches<br/>when he  became ex-President Truman.<br/><br/>What is it with the 1% that they don't see how giving anyone<br/>$ 400,000 for a speech, unless it is a speech explaining how Cancer<br/>or Blindness or Spinal Cord injuries can be healed is beyond understanding.<br/><br/>I used to wonder why the French Revolution and the Russian Revolutions<br/>were so brutal toward the Rich, I no longer wonder.
Sorry, with Trump in power, the cost of Obama's speech's fall into the "least of our worries category".  Move on.
I voted for President Obama three times (once of Senator), but really people, where does all this hagiography come from? Lest we forget, during Bush 2, the Justice dept indicted or successfully prosecuted virtually every single senior executive at Enron to prison, this despite a close personal connection between CEO Ken Lay and the Bush family. In contrast, following the worst financial crisis in 60 years (and don't tell me "it was GW's fault", all the significant deregulation that led to the crash took place during the Clinton years) how many senior executives from Wall Street firms did Mr. Obama's AG Eric Holder indict, let alone send to prison. That would be zero. I understand that simple people need simple answers: "Republicans bad! Democrats Good!", but the truth is, we live in a plutocracy. Whatever the monied interests tell the President is gonna happen, is gonna happen. Clinton, Bush, Obama, Trump, doesn't matter. Lloyd Blankfein and Jamie Diamon are still sitting in the same corner offices making the same phone calls.
I voted for Obama twice and would again, but his behavior since leaving office offends me. He and Michelle can get $65 for books they haven't written only by virtue of the trust and power the people of the US invested them with for eight years. Apparently, they don't get that. And $400k for a speech to Wall Street - that was my biggest complaint against Hillary. Will he, at least, release the text? Lastly, as a sailor, the very idea of a private island angers me - something genteel Obama obviously could never understand.<br/>Obama is still young. If he wants to continue to serve the country, he should follow John Q. Adam's example and try to get back to the Senate. That, I'd respect.<br/>If you're intrigued by the his and hers books, peruse them in the books store, leave a few dirty thumb prints, and put them back on the shelf. 
Why? Because he became president for this reason...to make himself rich, as did the Clintons. He is all hat, no cattle.   Talks the "every man" game, longs for Hollywood and Wall Street. Look who came to their parties. Who gives them homes and yachts for vacations? That's all you need to know. They are both frauds. But I thought that while they were in power.
I strongly disagree with this holier-than-thou posture of the NYT. There is no doubt that Obama will make very good use of his book and speech money. This reminds me of the hatred that was directed at Bill Gates, in direct proportion to his prominent fortune. Bill Gates' foundation is doing more to alleviate suffering in this world than the US government. Countless unknown good people dream of amassing a fortune precisely for the freedom and power it would afford them to effect something worthwhile in the world. Not everybody is focused on furnishing multiple residences with gilded toilets.   
I hope no one's surprised. <br/><br/>Barack Obama governed as a Wall Street Republican, we know his cabinet was appointed in toto by Citigroup, and as soon as he was elected he handed Treasury to the usual suspects.<br/><br/>Obama is simply cashing in, as our corrupted presidents now do. Obama never represented the 99% as president. He's not representing them now.<br/><br/>Get used to it, folks. The $65m book deal, the 400k speech... there will be the seats on boards paying $2m and requiring attendance at three meetings, there will be the partnerships, on and on. Payoffs, in other words. Get used to it. 
"As the presidential election clarified so painfully, the traditional party of working people has lost touch with them."<br/>Can't the NYTimes say working class? Does the NYT think the Clintons are friends of workers and the poor? Their "welfare reform" ended welfare and cast millions of children into extreme poverty while their "prison reform" threw millions of black fathers into prison.<br/><br/>American social programs are primitive and nasty compared to the standards of other wealthy democracies. And yet when Bernie proposed bringing some social programs to 1950's standards, the Grey Lady threw a fit and tried to cram Hillary down the throats of workers who, for excellent reasons, don't like her and don't trust her.<br/><br/>There is no national solidarity in the US today, no Christian compassion, no social empathy, no sense of togetherness. It's all the hustle and con  where a person's net worth is their human worth. Bernie and a few of his ilk are the only ones calling to the better angels of our natures.<br/>Americans have child poverty and an underclass without compare among wealthy democracies and the only response is the vicious snarl of the gulag.<br/><br/>The U.S. has no social democratic party. The Dems are business conservatives whose liberalism is entirely identity politics and who never speak of stark class divisions.<br/><br/>Under such circumstances it's perfectly natural that the working class chooses neo-fascism and a destruction of false friends.<br/><br/>I
Why do Progs have an issue with how people earn money?  Whatever happened to freedom?  With Progs you can't say anything, you can't do anything.  And Progs demand apologies constantly for saying something or doing something. <br/><br/>Obama didn't betray A-N-Y Prog values, Progs are delusional, believing no one is pursing wealth - see the Clintons - why railing against the wealthy. Meanwhile their kids wed hedgefund managers.    
Hillary Clinton's speeches helped sink her candidacy only because media outlets such as the New York Times chose not to report hard facts, like Trump's bribery of the  Florida AG or the federal investigation of Russian collusion with the Trump campaign, and instead repeated constantly the weasel word-laden accusation that Clinton's speeches "cast a cloud" over her campaign and "raised questions" -- or "threatened to raise questions" -- about her "penchant for secrecy." Obama's benign and legal post-presidential income will cause no harm if reported fairly, which sadly is as unlikely for the conduct of a Black man as it is for that of a woman.
Seems to me the editorial board could find something else to write about. Why dwell on the going rate from Wall Street instead of giving President Obama a chance to show us all his take on what to say to the Street folk?<br/><br/>Perhaps he'll publish his words and then, if you so desire, you can pounce!
It reconfirms my believe that the Democrats, trough holier-than-though hypocrisy, got Trump in the White House.  Obama and Hillary never came across as really for real.
I think President Obama will surprise the critics and give the money to charity or to the anti-gerrymandering effort led by Eric Holder.  Taking this money goes against everything he's told us and I don't see him as a liar or hypocrite.  Even though he's no longer President Obama, he is still Barack Obama.
So the Obama Foundation will do the noble work of teaching a new generation of leaders how to cash in while not being as crass as Donald Trump? Is that the distinction between "liberal" Democrats and "conservative" Republicans now?
I'm truly fed up with both you and WaPo for thinking that the first black president and the first woman who had a definite chance of being president should be "more pure" to the cause of the little person, than their white, male counterparts? Oh please. Those in public office give a great deal (other than the current President, and please feel FREE to hold him to a higher standard, m-kay?) of themselves. Why shouldn't they be allowed to have a few rewards once that's done?
They say that every man has his price. We'll have to get used to thinking about the Obamas as "fallen angels". I hate to think of them as if they were like the other politicians.  I'm sad.
I would like to know if the professional choices  of the writers of this article are as disciplined and self-sacrificing as they are suggesting Obamas' should be. I doubt it. Obama has done so much for this country, under the unending stress and vitriol of a republican lynch mob, who is doing everything in their power to undue, item by item, all his contributions. The viscousness of their attacks on the legacy of our first Afro-american president are as mind-boggling as it is sad. It is also not much of an incentive for Afro-Americans with worthwhile aspirations.<br/><br/>For all the wonderful, creative legislation he has left behind, why shouldn't Obama have a decent lifestyle to fall back on? The political system of this country is ruthless and thankless (in addition to the racism and hypocrisies it perpetuates ad infinitum). We have a past strewn with the corpses of good people who gave their all for this country. Why should Obama be one of them?<br/><br/>By the way, what does Trump have on the agenda for the people of the United States? Inviting one of modern historys' most brutal assassins to visit, and enlighten us as to his methods for achieving social justice. From a visionary leader who loved his people and his country, we now have an ignorant, psychotic demagogue who loves only himself.<br/><br/>Speaking of sacrifices, the present president, (an expert at lining the pockets of his and other family members) seems neither interested in or capable of making them.<br/><br/>So much for heroes! 
And you, dear esteemed Editorial Board, didn't see this coming?<br/><br/>When Obama let Michelle and the kids take luxurious vacations at taxpayer expense to places that the rest of America could only dream of visiting, you should have been well aware of their conversion to champagne tastes.<br/><br/>And, with the American taxpayer no longer available to foot the bill, it was inevitable that they would turn to the likes of Canter-Fitzgerald to fill the ice bucket.
Relax---it's OK for hope and change liberals to take $400,000 from big wall st banks for a 30 minute speech. It's capitalism!
I'm with Trevor Noah. I don't want the first Black President to pass up on these opportunities. Let some rich  White guy like George W. Bush or Donald Trump set the higher standard.
Very simply: I agree with the op-ed! How disheartening to see on fb fans of the president proudly display photos of the Obamas cavorting with billionaires and cry out how they miss Obama. I, on the other hand, am sickened by this ostentatious and unseemly ( given the new administration) display of wealth!
This country owes Mr. Obama and his family a great debt.  I really don't care who pays it.  He endoured behavior from a public and the political opposition that routinely crossed the line of decency.<br/><br/>Somewhat ironic that the office he occupied with grace and class is now held by a thug who obtained much of his fortune through questionable means and who, with his thin skin personality is not fit to carry Mr. Obama's briefcase.
Obama want to train and mold future leaders?  You mean to be limousine leftists?<br/><br/>"Socialism for thee, but not for me" should be the Obamas' credo. 
"Since Gerald Ford enriched himself with speaking fees and board memberships after leaving office, every former president but Jimmy Carter has supped often at the corporate table" .... This quote from an editorial in today's NYTimes reminds me once more that the one and only president in my lifetime with unquestionable ethics is the one most ridiculed by both press and population... There's true irony here; even in his initials..
Can you say 'hypocrit'?
Barack has been enough "firsts." Let Donald be the "first" ex-president to not profit from his name. Jeez can he do that NOW?
Somebody on the twitter pointed out this weekend that Larry The Cable Guy charges $400,000 for an appearance.<br/>Oh yeah.<br/>And that speech Hillary Clinton gave to Goldman Sachs?<br/>It was about hiring more women.<br/><a href="https://t.co/jM3uM5DjxO" title="https://t.co/jM3uM5DjxO" target="_blank">https://t.co/jM3uM5DjxO</a>
ah, it's because Dems are OWNED
How many of you on the editorial board would be willing to do your job for less than market value?
What would we have him do? Shun for profit activities to satisfy the NYTIMES sensitivities? Why? Do you trust him so little? What part of a sensible citizenship sees this as tainted in some way? This editorial is as churlish as it is naive. He has set the best example of any President in a generation. I trust his sense of right and wrong much more than I do your misplaced sense of disapproval.
Jarring to see?  What planet have you been living on for the past 8 years?  I never expected anything otherwise from the Obamas.  Sure, they're nice people who brought a decorum and dignity to the WH that the tacky and sleazy Clintons and Trumps were never going to.  But he's been a corporate Democrat through and through the entire time.  This is who the Democrats are now, and have been since Big Bill's time.  Any policy they cough up that seems like it might maybe benefit the proles comes stealth-bundled with a gift to corporate America and a backhander to the already suffering regular slobs.  And for all of their self-vaunted education, these dimwits can't figure out for the life of themselves why they can't get the turnout.
Goes to prove everyone has a price; Obama's price is 400K/hour
Get over it, NYT.  The Democrats and their rules-for-thee-but-not-me has resulted in Republicans controlling the Hill and statehouses all over America.  All the efforts of the Praetorian Guard media didn't help. Now the Obamas have dropped all pretense. 
Judge not lest thee be judged.  Know one knows what the Obamas will do with their money.  They aren't the type to blow their own horn and broadcast their charitable works. I think President and Mrs. Obama have made major contributions to our country and the world and they are destined to do more good regardless of the money they earn.  
The people are complaining about how much the Obamas are getting per speach do not get it. It takes $400000.00 to get Obama to show up and talk to a bunch of boring people. If I were him I'd be charging twice that.
Why does the first black president have to be the first president (Carter doesn't entirely count) to not make money for giving speeches?
I don't know why anyone would pay $400K for a speech (or the $1M that Reagan earned for a Japan speech). But what really galls me is this:  When white men (Reagan, Bushes, B. Clinton) make millions off of post-presidency speeches, it is fine. But god forbid a woman candidate or a black ex-president makes some money for the same activity.  The double-standard in this country would be stunning were it not on display every day. Et tu, NYT?
I guess he needs to pay his rent too? Isn't he renting a 9 bedroom mansion in Washington DC? In addition to paying mortgage for his house in Chicago?
Is there a conflict of interest or influence peddling that you can point to for this transaction, or is the New York Times Editorial Board simply preachifying? Whys is the New York Times singling out this President and not any of the other ones?<br/><br/>The New York Times has issues with the Clinton Foundation, but who did more good on the ground, the New York Times Editorial Board or the Clinton Foundation?<br/><br/>Yes, the Clinton Foundation took money from Saudi Arabia - millions in fact. Well, that's millions that Saudi won't get to spend on madrassas that teach everything from irrelevance to hatred of non-Muslims and of Muslims who are not Salafi and millions that the Saudis won't get a chance on spending to oppress their people. Does that count?<br/><br/>I really hate holier than thou. If you think you have sound ethical reasons for objecting, then by all means object. Otherwise, what am I supposed to do with your objection? I think you want perfection as defined by you, the New York Times Editorial Board. I have the distinct displeasure of remembering the self-righteous attitude of Bernie Sanders' supporters. Their self-righteousness and their desire for perfection is the sort of attitude that will bring down our political system.
And exactly how do you know with such damning certainty that President Obama will not be donating this money to his foundation's noble cause?<br/>Unlike with the current occupant of the White House where his narcissistic and rapacious tendencies are all too evident, I will defer any judgement of our past president until he actually stumbles in fact.
Nothing wrong with that-  you served the country well- this is your reward. 
Why don't the editors of the NYT go after President Trump? Is having billions too much for Trump? Why shouldn't Trump be held accountable for his 'morals'?<br/>Ask Trump why HE doesn't support his faithful followers? He could set up a charitable fund for those opioid addicts who need money to go to treatment facilities for 30 days or longer. There are plenty of ways Trump could support the white working poor in America through charitable contributions. But we do know how Trump uses those contributions, to buy paintings of himself!<br/>But for some reason the NYT has to go after Mr. Obama and hold him to a standard of behavior not required of others. Hypocritical and perhaps racist criticism not deserved.
Why should he set a higher standard?! He's done being president. How about the NYT focus on taking the current one to task instead, and I mean REALLY take him to task, rather than continuing to treat 45 with kid gloves in the name of your precious fair &amp; balanced reporting?
This is complete hogwash.  He has done nothing but set the highest standard and now the Times editorial board wants him to not earn a living?  He's no longer a public servant.  It is grossly unfair for you to expect him to consistently, constantly adhere to some arbitrary standard.  A standard you don't hold anyone else to.  (I submit that the exception is Hillary Clinton and of course you over held her to it.)  It is not unethical or inappropriate for him to earn a living.  He's a former president for god's sake and perhaps the best we've ever had.  $400k is peanuts coming from Wall St.  He should be getting much, much more from those thieves.  This sort of judgemental, self-righteous opinion is what ultimately drives people to vote for con artists like Donald Trump.
I agree with your editorial.
So I'd guess Trump is on vacation today or something.  This is really unseemly - for NYT Opinion.<br/><br/>Barack Obama is a successful two term president who put up with more undeserved criticism than any previous.<br/><br/>Of all the Billionaires out there getting paid 10x more - can't you just be happy one of our own has made it and is getting his just rewards?<br/><br/>It's not like he didn't work for it or deserve it!  <br/><br/>This is why Democrats have no farm team.  We beat each other up unnecessarily over really dumb stuff like paychecks.
Who cares? I would speak at events if they paid $400k.  wouldn't you? 
This strikes me as a very racist opinion.  Really?! Barak Obama should not be paid like everyone else who gives speeches to Wall Street?  Because he our champion?  Please.  It seems to me that the only time paid speeches to Wall Street are a problem are when they are made by a woman or a black man.  
When all you do is hang around on private islands with billionaires after you leave office, while at the same time the country is falling to pieces and Americans are suffering because of the maniacs who have seized control of the government, it says all you need to know about who the real Obama is. Obama is just like Ike and Reagan. He loves to surround himself with wealthy people who keep him and his family in the style of life they have become accustomed to living.  And in return he gives his billionaire buddies what they want, access and a get out of jail free card.  
Interesting article.  Is it an attempt by the NYT to say goodbye to Obama?  The comments by Readers is fascinating.  I could imagine these posts as conversations at a coffee shop.  Amazing reading.
Surprise .. not, Obama another of the phony, money grabbing elites.
“So the first black president must also be the first one to not take money afterwards? No, no, no, my friends. He can’t be the first of everything.” — TREVOR NOAH"
These comments demonstrate the Liberals dont understand the meaning of hypocracy, except when it applies to Republicans
So the woman and the African-American should  be the first to forego the perks once again?  Please.  As soon as white men give up their privilege, maybe.
Sorry Mr. Obama but "everyone does it," is not a good excuse.
Will you never learn? Why are you amplifying the meme that liberal purity is tainted by making money.<br/>Trump deflected criticism of his wealth and business practices by headlining Clinton's speeches to Wall Street; it was a rhetorical device, based on mockery and emotion; it is a testament to the power of his base oratory that this perspective is now embedded and that the Times writes the same propaganda.<br/>Trump won by avoiding reason and by elevating doubt and envy, the Times continues to assist.
Something tells me that President Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama will put that money to good use.  Oh ye of little faith....
Good grief, enough with the hand wringing and finger pointing at Democrats. The norm is that every eight years, the White House switches hands. That's what happened in 2016. Enough with the "what possibly could have happened to create this unforeseen crisis in the Democratic Party??" panic attacks and over analysis. Today the flavor of the panic attack is Barack Obama's paid speech. This is ridiculous. The sitting Republican president just invited Rodrigo Duterte, murderous sexist thug in charge of the Philippines, to the White House--and this sitting president has private financial interests in the Philippines.  How about we focus on those in power now and the myriad ACTUAL conflicts of interest involved in their conduct as government officials.  That's real news.
Please provide URLs for your lectures on this subject to Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, or I might think this is only a problem for women and black people.
No, no, no; not you, too, NYT Ed Board:  not only is Obama's getting paid for his valuable time and insights before key groups an inappropriate topic for a Board op-ed; it's also just FINE - and even useful -- for him to do so.  NYT, please devote your Ed Board pieces to things that really matter - e.g. the atrocities of the current White House occupant and the craven Republican Congress.
I am outrages by this editorial. 1. Cantor Fitzgerald is holding a conference on health care in September!!!!!!<br/>2. Did anyone on the editorial board ask what Obama is going to do with the money? 3.I am tired of the bashing on Obama and Hillary who are always held to a higher standard without looking at the substance of what they are doing and yet so many others on the right and extreme left skate by.<br/><br/>This editorial fosters negativity and feeds the populist belief that all politicians are crooked.<br/>How dare the editorial board criticize Obama when you all stood by the march to war in Iraq, knowing that some on your staff had written articles that pointed out that there were no WMDs.<br/>If this is to get more business for your paper by appealing to the Right or the Progressives , you are part of the problem .<br/>As my four year old grand-daughter would say, "DISGUSTING".
Well, Good Morning, New York Times!  Just waking up to the idea that Barack Obama was more closely attuned to the values and needs of the country's wealthiest citizens??<br/><br/>But why?  Like you said, he WROTE IT IN HIS BOOK!!!<br/><br/>Great reporting.  Maybe another piece of brow-furrowing on why millions of financially stressed Americans are so cynical about the Democrat's class-warfare hypocrisy that they are being taken for granted anymore.<br/><br/>"Those darned 1% are robbing you blind!!  Vote for me and I'll take some of it back!!"
Oh, so the CEO of United Health--who happens to live in my community, can, on any given year make over 100 million dollars but our former President is supposed to "set a higher standard" by going bargain basement with his speeches?  I love the double standard--how the Black man (and the woman--yes, I mean Hillary) ALWAYS are expected to take the "high road," and show us all how virtuous they are!  Meanwhile, every white male CEO (and that would be the majority of corporations who are headed by exactly that demographic) can charge whatever they like for anything and no one calls them on it at all.  Shame on you NYT Editorial Board for once again making sure that while white corporate executives continue to be able to fleece our nation and still be considered "the pillars of community," women and minorities--even a former President, have to balance on the tightrope of tokenism and exceptionalism!  And, just for the record, how many white males sit on your editorial board anyway?
Mr. Obama, donate that money.  Pull a Jimmy Carter and retain a shred of dignity.
Oh, please get off your high horse.  How is this anyone's business other than Obama's and Cantor Fitzgerald? 
Oh look, the emperor has no clothes.....Mr. Obama is just another phony who used the poor and middle class to ultimately enrich himself.
After reading this, I heaved a huge sigh and wondered what this Editorial Board was thinking... clearly it thought it was making some sort of moral argument about money and presidents but the moral failings reflected were instead their own.<br/><br/>This should be the very last thing they should be worried about - a speech that has yet to take place by a private citizen, as opposed to an administration actively in power profiting from being in public service. Seriously NYT? Where is your judgment here? The dichotomy of the hypocrisy slaps you in the face.<br/><br/>Why does Obama need to pass some phantom purity test that none of us, including members of this board, would ever follow or really expect anyone to follow living in the capitalist society?<br/><br/>This is a waste of inches on a paper, and does nothing but perpetuate double standards that Obama has been subjected to his entire tenure as a public servant.
There is nothing to learn here.  We're all hypocrites.
It seems hypocritical for a newspaper that clearly caters to a weathy elite readership would be up in arms about Mr. Obama's earnings.<br/><br/>Despite what this newspaper may believe, Mr. Obama is a private citizen who has a right to earn a living as he sees fit.<br/><br/>Moreover, Mr. Obama also has every right to use his newly found wealth to help finance a presidental library, donate charitable causes and fund the fight for progressive causes, just as Bill and Hillary Clinton did, which this same newspaper conveniently forgot to mention in this editoral and throughout last year's presidental campaign.
This is another foolish expression of the double standard applied to people of color in the US. We must be morally "perfect," i.e., entirely within the bounds set out by the Protestant code of humility and subservience, or we get dinged. It is a sublimated form of oppression. It's converse is that white folks, when they do something (anything) that they should do, receive outsized praise. This is a moral sublimation of dominant behavior. Your stance is primitive. If, in fact, you feel that money is problematic, you should become a nonprofit entity, cut all salaries to living wage, and pursue "all the news that's fit to print," with the rigor and integrity that you demand of Obama. If you want to go down that road, I'm pretty sure you'd end up on the short end of that evaluation, dollar for dollar. 
Wow...the "current workaday vulgarity now in office."  That is THE MOST CONDESCENDING statement I have read in a long time.  President Trump was voted in by 95% of the counties in the United States.  95%.  The President represents those "poor people" that Obama claimed to represent and which the Democrat party (and you) deem as vulgar, stupid, racist, etc.  Shame on you.
They are now showing their true colors. Michelle will soon be following suit. The Obamas are limousine liberals and elitists.<br/><br/>Maybe they can take some tips from their pal, Hedge Fund Hillary. <br/><br/>I was one of the first to support Barack and Michelle Obama when he came on the scene in early 2007, actively campaigning for him. Sigh*...is it any wonder voters have become jaded and sometimes cynical? Politics is a dirty business.
I think he either sh'dn't have done it or have done and announced he was recycling the Wall St cash to charity.
Do I have this right? The "board" is chastising Barack Obama for "cashing in" while Donald Trump sits in the White House?<br/><br/>What a joke. A rather pathetic joke.
Hey, Editorial Board:  Trump is using the USA as his private piggy bank, and he is currently the sitting POTUS.  
I so miss President Obama's steady leadership in the White House, but I'm distressed that he accepted this speaking fee because it plays to every misconception many Trump voters have about who the Clinton wing of the Democratic Party is beholden to.   It's not true, but the perception is there and the Republicans will use this $400,000 against the Democrats to muddy the waters about who is really on the side of working folks in this Country.    Bernie Sanders, Michael Moore and many other political figures who do have the feel of working people feared that Hillary was heading for a setback with these voters and sure enough it happened.  Obama, Hillary and the rest of the establishment never saw it coming, but Moore and Sanders sensed the backlash.  Democrats cannot afford to be tone deaf to things like this.   
To judge from these comments, many Americans do not want any better ethics out of their leaders. For them, the acceptance of Wall Street money is normal, everybody else does it, why not? Many readers also vigorously refuse any comparison of Obama with Trump - though no such comparison is mentioned in the article. It is as though their inner ideal were threatened, the fear of a punctured narcississm. This mix of ordinary venality and the fantasy of purity is characteristic of American public life today. Our democracy is collapsing into an oligarchy, with permanent damage from climate change as a result of the incapacity for principled decisions and self-sacrifice, and you don't want a principled elder statesman? Think about it a little!
A few distinct points:<br/><br/>Context matters.  If Obama was charging this fees while being in position of directly influencing a legislation or a major decision that would benefit the sponsoring firm.  He isn't.  Democratic party is not in power where he can use his pull.  So why are people upset?  <br/><br/>Besides, there are no absolute standards for fairness.  People who complained now would also complained if he charged $100,000.  So why bother?<br/><br/>There is nothing wrong in making money.  How the acquired wealth is spent is what counts.  We should hope that he will use the wealth for better reasons than most others.<br/><br/>Finally, for those who criticize Obama for charging enormous fees ... would they pass up similar opportunity, if it they were presented with one???
At the end of the day, it looks like politics is the clear path to riches. I am a West African where individuals use their positions in government to get rich. I know first hand how money currupts and deminishes democratic institutions. In particular, when ex politicans use a revolving door as a means to riches. It well illustrates the disconnect between those in government and those they purport to govern.
Obama's important and valued voice in our progressive politics depends on our continued perception of his high principles. I hope it's not too late for him to turn this around by announcing that at least a substantial amount of his speaking fee will find its way to a public good. If it helps to fund his effort to challenge gerrymandering he may justly be able to claim that he is redistributing some wealth from Wall Street to enable less privileged citizens to have their voices heard too.
I fully agree with everything said in this editorial.  I am shocked and very disappointed in the huge speaking fees President Obama will put in his personal pocket.  I have been a devoted fan for these past ten years, but the money he is collecting now has turned me sour.  Please re-think this, Mr. Obama.
The Democratic establishment's blind defense of Obama mirrors their tone deafness to Hillary Clinton's too-cozy relationship with Wall Street during the last election. They just refuse to get the fact that people want politicians who work for them, not the fat cats who have been making out like bandits for the last few decades. It doesn't matter that Obama is no longer in office--the message being sent is that we'll be nice to you and you'll make it worth our while when we public life. They will keep losing until they offer the American people a truly progressive alternative.
Just to keep this in perspective, the $400,00p is 8 times less than the savings Trump will save under his proposal to end the AMT. 
Understand the $400,000 for what it is: a bribe to other political leaders, present and future. The message is "be nice to us and there is a big payday waiting for you when you get out of office".  
No surprises here. Obama does not belong on a pedestal. He was a fallible, mediocre president. In so many instances, he rejected liberal-progressive problem solving in favor of accommodating entrenched interests—discarding the public option, pivoting to the deficit during a time of economic hardship, using Social Security as a bargaining chip, failing to hold Wall Street accountable, and most egregiously promoting the TPP. His actions set an example for future presidents seeking personal gain and reflect the decline of a once-great political party. 
How much money do these people need? Just once I'd like to have a leader who lives modestly and frugally. All we ever get is greedy people, and Obama has shown himself to have feet of clay in that regard. <br/><br/>The Democrats wallow in the same slop and feed at the same trough as their GOP brethren. Unless and until we have a consitutional amendment directing public financing of all elections, we will continue our downward trajectory into irrelevance as a "democracy."
You wrote: "But why not elevate a new generation of political leaders *and* stay true to his values by giving his speech fees to his foundation and other charities focused on those goals?"<br/><br/>Do you have evidence that President Obama does *not* intend to use his speech fees to fund his foundation, in whole or in part? If not, why do imply that he has no such intent?<br/><br/>I think the time to start moralizing about President Obama's departure from his financial ethical standards would be if he builds an 18-bedroom mansion (with car lifts) on a PGA championship golf course, or applies for membership at Mar-a-Lago. <br/><br/>Harry Truman left Washington virtually penniless and stayed that way until a "generous" (and embarrassed) Congress voted him a $25,000 annual pension. But that was Harry. Times have changed, and huffiness about one of the world's most significant personages being paid a substantial speaking fee seems... unbecoming.    
Although I still like President Obama very much, it is important to remember that  he was an establishment Democrat.  Both establishment Democrats and Republicans do these things.  They are part of corporate American culture.<br/><br/>Trump, on the other hand, lied baldly by portraying himself as non-establishment, drain the swamp, anti-Wall Street.  He is a lying, faux populist.<br/><br/>Establishment Democrats and Republicans just don't lie about it.
Hillary lost the electoral college for lots of reasons and those speeches were one of the reasons.
Why is taking $400,000 from Wall St. for a speech such a bad thing? He just may give the money to his foundation or charity. It is his money to do with as he prefers.<br/>If you want to acknowledge scandal on the editorial page, Trump gives you at least one example on a daily basis. His trips to Mar-A-Lago at taxpayers expense. The refusal to move his wife and child to the White House as every other President in the same situation has done. These are not private dollars he is wasting.<br/>Obama ran the most scandal free Presidency in modern times. That is the credit he deserves and should get. Don't let the trees block out the forest. 
Obama doesn't need the money. He should set up a charity and donate all his speech fees to it. Period.
The problem here is how you define the moral poles in the behavior of the rich and powerful. Manichean thinking will not get you there. Immorality may be completely selfish, but morality - with a few saintly exceptions - is not completely self-denying. Manichean thinking here beggars the good and empowers the bad.<br/><br/>These moral poles are better defined in terms of mental health and psychopathy. Mental health, in Adler's terms, combines both self-actualization and community. Maturity is a process of constantly developing and reconciling both.<br/><br/>Psychopathy - pure selfishness - is rooted in the inability to comprehend community. Incomprehensible community deeply threatens the pychopath's need for control.<br/><br/>Despite this modern frame of reference these ideas have deeply ancient roots and are a critical part of the foundation of our civilization. The ancient Greek cycle of governments identifies these moral personality types as the driving forces behind good and bad government. The mentally healthy leaders build great civilizations. The psychopaths loot them to death.<br/><br/>The Founders closely studied these lessons in the works of Polybius and Montesquieu, and in metaphorical form in the much loved story, "Hercules' Choice," where these two moral personality types are presented to the young Hercules' in the form of attractive but very different women.<br/><br/>See Maccoby on effective leaders and Hate &amp; Babiak's on corporate psychopaths' for the modern frame of reference.
Who cares.  I hope he does this a 100 times over and pockets substantially every cent, after taxes.  Let's focus on people in politics and what they're doing.
I would hope that President Obama would give as many speeches for free or some nominal reimbursement for every one that pays lavishly. 
These are just the beginning days of President Obama and First Lady Michelle finding their way in their new ex-presidential world. Have faith that they will find their path in this as they have done in the past. It’s baked in their character.<br/><br/>If they do take up collecting money from Wall Street, I am sure they will raise a ton of it and spend it well on the causes they believe in.
If somebody offered to pay me $400K for making a speech I'd take it in a NY minute.
I look at it as just compensation for the horrendous disrespect and abuse opposition politicians and citizenry heaped on him for 8 years.
i do not think we should pass judgement at this time. Let's wait and see.
Much ado about nothing! A scandal free administration and now as a private citizen the man isn't allowed to make money? Why isn't the current administration held to any kind of standard as far as making money while IN PUBLIC SERVICE? Until there is some real accountability from this Congress concerning  the  conflicts concerning the Trump financial bonanza while supposedly serving the American people, perhaps we should calm down about the Obamas cashing in as private citizens. 
"Set a higher standard"?  Maybe $500,000?
President Obama and his family represented this country and its people with integrity, intelligence, and class for eight years. <br/><br/>He is no longer president. He is no longer a elected or appointed member of the government. He, and his family, are entitled to earn as much as they can or want as private citizens.<br/><br/>Why don't you focus on the classless, clueless individual currently despoiling the White House and the reputation and moral standing of this country. <br/><br/>Why don't you focus on the grifters known as the family Trump and their hypocritical enablers in the senate and house. <br/><br/>Leave the Obama's to live their lives as they see fit. They have earned!!
All of this indignant criticism of Pres. Obama for accepting this speaking engagement and the fee is symptomatic of the serious problems that the  progressive movement and the Democratic Party have to overcome.  There is a significant opportunity in the 2018 midterms but it will be squandered if we don't start using common sense, shed the politically correct nonsense and adopt a centrist/left approach.  At this point I see nobody whom I would want to lead the opposition to what I fear is a GOP/fascist juggernaut.
"Now, as he commits to building future American leaders, we have the audacity to hope he’ll set a higher standard for past presidents."<br/><br/>What is this future tense nonsense you go out with? Obama is a fraud, was a fraud, will always be a fraud. His believers are no less delusional, no less dishonest, than Trump's.<br/><br/>One more time: the Republican party is pure evil, the Democratic party utterly useless. This is our democracy, this is our country.
"You're the average of the 5 people you spend the most time with".<br/><br/>This is what happens when you hang out with celebrities. The "Rajat Gupta effect", as I would call it: a highly respected man known widely for his smarts, business success, and strategic counsel who started hanging around billionaires and suddenly the millions he had weren't enough. He wanted more to fit in with the aspirational crowd, and then one thing led to another...<br/><br/>I love President Obama. He is entitled to live the life he wants. But, we don't need to agree with everything he does and his personal choices. Just like we should never forget that "idols always have feet of clay".
This editorial is obnoxious.<br/><br/>Speaking fees have been a commonly accepted occurrence in our society since forever.  I don't think I've ever heard any whining about speaking fees being paid to a successful, famous white man. <br/><br/>I wonder why people are all the sudden really upset about it when those fees are being paid to a woman and a minority.<br/><br/>I wish this paper spilled as much ink on the Koch Brothers' purchase of influence as they did to HRC's speeches.<br/><br/>The idea that Mr. Obama must continue to martyr himself for The Cause is noxious. 
Part of the job. Good man. 
Why is the Times condemning a speech that hasn't been delivered yet?<br/><br/>Maybe Obama will take Wall Street's money and then denounce their values and behavior. Wouldn't that be a kick?<br/><br/>This is an opportunity to directly communicate with these people. In their faces.
In most cases it really isn't any of our business what someone earns.   I believe that the Obamas will donate THEIR money to causes that they believe in.  They will invest in organizations who know how to make changes in communities.  Making the $400k speech fee a headline only gives people stones to throw.  There are bigger and more important stories out there.
Give it a rest. Black people are always held to a different standard. Focus on trump. He's using his office as his personal piggybank. President Obama is a private citizen. trump and his children are cutting deals and making policy based on their bottom line. Where is the criticism about that? 
He now admits he made up most of Dreams From My Father, the book that launched him to fame and eventually the presidency.  His whole candidacy was based on a false fame based on a fake book.
He obviously needs the money to keep up with his new gazillionaire friends. Sigh.
Given the way our current president brags about his money, this article is absolutely hilarious.
I find it amazing that the well-heeled, genteel people associated with this editorial desk -- whose money has passed down through generations -- would have the audacity to lecture the first black president for accepting money from Wall Street (for which he is likely to say to Wall Street how their money has corrupted our politics).  However, it's not lost on me that these are the same people who argued to disarm South Africa of its nuclear capability as a condition to black power.  Who is the hypocrite?!
Regarding the Democratic Party, this article is all the more reason that we need a new party, the People's Progressive Party....and we need it now!  "The Obamas are starting a foundation whose work will include “training and elevating a new generation of political leaders in America."  Sadly, I suspect these "new" political leaders in training will just reflect who and what dominates the Democratic Party now....more corporatists.  I'll be dead by the time Bernie "transforms" the Democratic Party!  
Reading the NYT Picks comments changed my mind.  And I just love that.  I had been uneasy about the 400K and confused about why I was uneasy, and now I'm not.  Thank you NYT pickers and thank you to the thoughtful and intelligent people who commented.
The Democratic Party is choking on self-flattering and toothless sanctimony. It is this, more than anything, that alienates those who defected from it. 
I do not agree with this perspective at all. If people want to pay him these sums for a speech let them. Maybe the editorial board should forgo their salaries for a year. Really commit to doing the good work of unbiased journalism...
Tone deaf! No doubt his legacy is Mr Trump!<br/>This is so typical American Capitalism!
Every so often I am lulled into perusing an article or op-ed by this paper and quickly realize why I stopped subscribing years ago and started ignoring what the editorial board chose to let into their paper or publish on the opinion pages.  It's sad that what was once such a fine institution of journalism has taken to the vices of today's tabloid coverage but NYT has hook, line and sinker and judging from many of the comments, so too has its readership.  Can we not disagree with another's position without resorting to name calling.  Clearly, the NYT thinks very lofty of Mr. &amp; Mrs. Obama and very little of Mr. and Mrs. Trump.  That's fine.  But to describe the latter's methods as being "vulgar" detracts from the piece, it doesn't add to it.  Vulgarity is engaging in oral sex in the Oval Office; it is not engaging in a brand of politics to which you do not subscribe and if the NYT's editorial board cannot see the difference between the two, then perhaps it is time for these folks to turn off their word processors and retire to a life sending back sandwiches at a local deli.
Sorry, my friends, you dropped the ball on this one. For my unfiltered sentiments, see Trevor Noah from the other day. In this instance, the Black guy is not going to be first. I get tired of outsized expectations for  Black folks. Ronald Reagan got 2 million dollars thirty years ago for a speech in Japan. The Clintons filled their coffers post presidency. President Obama  gives one speech and he's causing an ethical crisis? Give me  a break. Let the white guy be the first to set the new trend. The magical black guy just left the room.
Anybody know what the dude actually said in the speech? 
Just in the nick of time, the NY Times ed board closes the barn door .... "hey, America, you've got a corruption problem." But they picked the wrong guy to single out ... the better question and issue is what he does with the money. The Clinton Foundation does great work, and it also makes the Clinton's rich. Donald Trump and many others are out and out frauds.<br/>Thanks Times for missing the point. 
Who deserves that $400,000 more--Goldman Sacks or Barack Obama?
Trevor Noah begs to differ:<br/><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iB2gEJLd_p8" title="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iB2gEJLd_p8" target="_blank">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iB2gEJLd_p8</a>
It's not "tone deafness." It's outright betrayal and probable corruption. I thought the Times was going to get tough and call things for what they are. 
Who on your Editorial Board would turn down 400,000 to give a speech? If they value his wisdom that much to make that offer that is their business not ours.<br/>  Take the plank out.
Last month Michelle Obama visited a D.C. high school, meeting students (some of whom sobbed in her presence) to discuss college aspirations - kids who'd never met anyone famous. The Obamas?  Their hearts are in the right place. President Obama saved us from spiraling into a 2nd Great Depression.  I'm personally grateful to him that I finally have health insurance.<br/><br/>Meanwhile, the current "President" has installed his ignorant children as White House advisors. (Jared's felon dad reportedly bought his admission to Harvard &amp; NYU Law School w/ million$ donations).  The sleazy Trumps are monetizing the presidency while in office, Trump spiriting foreign leaders to his $200,000 membership private golf resort as "the 2nd White House," promoting the chocolate cake while planning a bombing. And Congress says nothing, no ethics charged have been filed.  If HRC had done this she would've been impeached already.<br/><br/>Trump inherited a fortune from his dad &amp; he's spent his life lying, cheating, bankrupting &amp; using people &amp; now embarrasses our country by cashing in on the Office of the President.<br/><br/>Barack &amp; Michelle Obama had no wealth, paid off huge student loans &amp; had the most inspirational, scandal-free, ethically clean Presidency in our lifetime. Complaining the brilliant, talented, classy Obama shouldn't give this speech is silly.  Especially after HRC destroyed her candidacy accepting $120 million before running. Obama in not selling access.<br/><br/>I'm grateful to the Obamas &amp; wish them well.
This editorial reads like it was forced.  What a bunch of hypocrites.  Since when is it not okay to make money?  I thought the times advocated for a market based economy with an eye towards helping those who from time to time need a helping hand.  He didn't come by that fee by lying, cheating or stealing.  They offered and he accepted.  Would not you guys and gals do the same?<br/><br/>Just in case you were not aware, President Obama is not running for office again.
The horrible President Trump donates his salary.  He, unlike the Clintons and the Obamas, didn't have to rely on taxpayer money to make his own money.
The visceral liberal elite and their acolytes attempts to justify the obvious avaricious nature of past President Obama, is sickening.<br/><br/>Their hatred of differing opinions, and beliefs, exposes their bigotry.
Sorry, but after 8 years of him being the Empty Suit in Chief you still think Obama is a great guy who could do better than he does?  He's the populist that you convinced yourselves wasn't a populist.  He's the guy who tried to rule by decree that you convinced yourselves was a democrat.<br/><br/>You guys ain't fooling anyone but yourselves.
Liberal leaders spout socialist nonsense, but when it comes down to their own pockets, they're capitalists, just like the rest of us.<br/><br/>And there's nothing wrong with it - capitalism is what made America great and USSR die.
Et tu, NYT?  I'm surprised you didn't join the chorus demanding that he return to community organizing or do a "poverty tour" (whatever that is). First a black man had the temerity to run for president, now he doesn't know his place and should be held to a higher standard than his predecessors.<br/><br/>I'll care about this when the sanctimonious critics in Congress stop looking the other way at the blatant kleptocracy being run out of the Oval Office and when I see a front page headline in the NYT demanding congressional hearings.<br/><br/>Until then, neither Congress nor the NYT has any standing to criticize Obama for not adopting "higher standards" of what is a perfectly legal market transaction.
The wink and nod Obama gave to Wall Street is paying off for him.
Obama schedules a speech where he will make 400k (among other pro bono speeches).  Tump schedules a tax plan that will make him and his children and his cronies BILLIONS if not trillions over the next 10 years.  And which does the NYT Editorial Board choose to skewer?  I don't get it.
Nothing new here. He took millions of campaign dollars from the rich.<br/>He vacationed with the rich and famous.<br/>He should have spent his down time in the poor ghettos of America ( the folks that voted for him at around 99% )...remember the Philadelphia exit polls?
It seems that the only person who publicly celebrates Obama's speech--and its price--is Donald Trump!  It is the one thing that has brought many people, on both sides of the "Aisle" together.  But frankly, would any of them have turned-don such a payday?<br/><br/>Keep in mind that, it's a "Speaker's Market", and former President Barack Hussein Obama is the only Immediate Past President.  Move aside, Mona Lisa!  And ironically, Donald Trump is coaxing "Barry's" price up, with every word, Tweet, faux Executive Order or choreographed photo-op!<br/><br/>Who, but the former President can offer the best observations about:  what the job is like, in today's world; what words of wisdom, and offers of advice, he might have provided; and whatever comments, although definitely carefully parsed, as to Trump's current job report.<br/><br/>So, what IS the difference between paying President one dollar, and twelve million dollars.  As they say with one-of-a-kind parcels of land, or pieces of art:  PRICELESS!<br/><br/><a href="https://thetruthoncommonsense.com" title="https://thetruthoncommonsense.com" target="_blank">https://thetruthoncommonsense.com</a>
Did it take the NYT this long to figure out that Obama and wife are in everything for the money? At least, I'm not having to foot the bill for his speaker's fee. I'm sorry that I'm having to pay for his secret service people, but we do that for all ex-Presidents, which is ridiculous in my opinion. Once they are out of office, they should be treated like ordinary citizens. You leftists constantly talk about Trump's lies. Instead of fixating on falsehoods, perhaps you should take a closer look at Obama's lies. He is the man you elected by not ever vetting him at all. At least Trump has not been living off the voters for years and years. You never talk about how he isn't going to keep his salary but is donating it. No wonder you rate so low in the opinion of the ordinary voter.
I have a great deal of respect for the New York Times, but I think this editorial should be removed sooner rather than later.  I don't think you meant to sound like a black president should not make money giving speeches after his presidency is over while every other president in modern history has made a great deal of money doing this very thing.  Why should Obama be held by the different standard?
Dear Editors: Did you ask Obama what he intends to do with the speaking fee?  More responsible reporting would have included such information.<br/><br/>It would also have included information about past charitable donations, such as the following:<br/><br/>According to an article in Forbes he and Michelle gave $1.1 million to charities while he was in the White House.  During that period, they earned $10.8 million - from his salary as President and $7.2 million from sale of his book.  Obama also directed the Nobel Committee to give to charities the $1.4 million he won in 2009 for the Nobel Prize.<br/><br/>From 2009 to 2014 Trump gave $0 to charities.  We do not know what he earned during that period.  We also know he pretended that he had given $4.4 million from his Foundation during that period but he was really re-gifting donations from other people.<br/><br/>You Editors might at least have Googled charitable donations by Obama are included such information.  <a href="https://www.forbes.com/sites/danalexander/2017/02/06/obama-donated-over-1-million-to-charity-as-president-heres-where-the-money-went/#78010485459e" title="https://www.forbes.com/sites/danalexander/2017/02/06/obama-donated-over-1-million-to-charity-as-president-heres-where-the-money-went/#78010485459e" target="_blank">https://www.forbes.com/sites/danalexander/2017/02/06/obama-donated-over-...</a> 
Dear NYT Editorial Board,<br/><br/>A long time ago in a America that seems very far away, a reporter (perhaps one of yours) asked Willie Sutton why he robbed banks? Willie's answer was clear and straightforward, without hesitation Willie answered, "because that's where they keep the money!".<br/><br/>Democrats who claim to represent "the people" still understand that Wall St. is "still where they keep the money!". President Obama and his wife are just doing what President Clinton and his wife did after they moved out of the White House. <br/><br/>Why are you surprised? Did you expect things to be different?
Cash in, Mr. President!<br/><br/>Barack Obama has paid his dues.  His daughters were brought up in the White House and they paid their dues too.  And Michelle was criticized mercilessly for what?  Trying to make kids eat healthy?  No one is guaranteed how long they will live.  Why not be assured of making what he can?<br/><br/>No regulations are being put on the present president nor his family members who lord over the White House.  You think they won't make money off wherever when they leave the White House?  Look what they're taking in now - legally or illegally.  Mr. Obama's daughters are much younger - why shouldn't he look out for their futures?<br/><br/>He should earn what he can while he can.  Not like he's getting paid off by the Russians......
It is hilarious watching the hand-wringing on the left about the Obama speech pay. It's as if they actually believed all along that their Messiah was above all that, and would make the world heal and the oceans recede.
Barak Obama conned this country well with his spending, initiating student debt, energy, and everything else he did including pardoning 3,000 prisoners. He was not interested in making this country great.  His world class apologies were embarrassing to this country.  Finally people voted against the socialism of this man who was an eight year empty suit.  Good riddance.
Everyone is questioning the money. How about ask to hear the speech. Then you'll know his true values. Obama has never been a champion of the little guy. We have 8 years of proof. Obama is out to help Obama.
Barack Obama took America to a new low in History. He made America weak and feckless. It doesn't surprise me at all that he does not practice what he preaches.
Thank you to the NYT Editorial Board for a very needed and pointed commentary!
Once again, NYT, get your perspective straight.  Obama is one of the best public speakers in the world.  What is wrong with him getting paid well for one of his many gifts?  I'm happy for him.   This editorial is pandering to right-wing hate.  Why shouldn't he or Clinton, extraordinarily capable and smart people, get paid? Compare that to the Dumpster costing the taxpayers millions every trip to Mar-a-Lago as he destroys our country.  
So, lemme see...Barack and Michelle are starting a foundation to educate young people. He is in demand as a speaker...because he can speak...multi-syllable words...with intelligence and humor. This fee, along with money from book deals will likely help to fund the new foundation...which will be a legitimate foundation, doing important work.<br/><br/>Take the 400 grand, Barack...take a million if you can...and put that money to work educating young people...Lord knows your opponents are doing everything they can to get rid of public education completely.
He is an upstart! First week in Oval Office he sent his wife and kids to Paris for shopping!! They could have waited and bought "Made In USA", but no!! Had to go to Paris on my Tax money!
No problems w/ GHW Bush dealing with the Saudis after the gulf war and making money from the Carlisle Group?  It's not GW Bush's fault that he's so unpopular no one wants to hear him speak.  I mean the butcher also known as Dick Cheney still gives paid speeches and he's a war criminal yet not a peep.  Hey folks, I DO. NOT. CARE. if Barack Obama makes a gazillion dollars making speeches. 
Maybe I missed something.  Did it say anywhere that Mr. Obama was keeping the fee paid to him?  Do you know something that you're not reporting?<br/>Maybe he's accepting the fee and will turn over a percentage to his foundation.  Maybe not.<br/>I find it uncomfortable that anyone gets paid that kind of money to speak.  At least he knows how to speak and has something to say.  
I am pleased to see the Obamas working their way back into public discourse, and I don't really feel concerned about whatever fee Mr. Obama was offered and accepted for speaking to those who probably need to hear his views.  While I do not put him on a pedestal, I also do not think a salacious discussion about how much he is getting paid is my concern.  We owe this man a huge dept of gratitude for salvaging the wrecked economy he inherited from the misguided neo-Con era when 3 wars were launched without funding and we saw a complete bumbling of rebuilding efforts in the aftermath.  President Obama averted Great Depression 2 and now the Chief Idiot is trying to remove the "pesky regulations" he implemented over the vhement objections of the rather blind GOP.  With the vulgarity and WWF-level the new administration has brought to the office, let's focus on curtailing the GOP's headlong dive into more "trickle-down" economics despite all evidence that such policies have helped to all but wipe out America's once vibrant Middle Class and reverse the march toward racial economic equality in this country.  Whatever President Obama is paid - he is worth every penny.
"..As a couple and a family, the Obamas brought grace, empathy and high standards to their time in the White House,.."<br/><br/>The single most hilarious and, at the same time, sad and pathetic sentence of political propaganda written in my life time. 
Just the typical hypocracy of Democrats.
This just goes to prove the level of corruption our society has sunk too. Obama is a fraud and will always be a fraud. He is more comfortable and has been even before being President with NBA stars, Rappers and Actors. His level of cowardice in dealing with our foreign adversaries show he was always in it to cash in. Only a man that could divide us and put our national sovereignty at risk is a fraud. FRAUD!
Speaker Fees are a great way of laundering bribes! And given the Obama Admins poor record of prosecuting Wall Street for crimes related to the Financial Crisis, a Federal Grand Jury should be called to investigate Obama and other members of his admin who have cleaned up financially after leaving office.
Its a betrayal of real journalism to devote any space in this paper to Obama's speech until you have thoroughly covered the profound and outrageously egregious, nepotistic, kleptocracy now under way.  Is this a nod to "balance"?<br/><br/>Give me a break.
President Obama donated over $1M to charity while he was in office.  More than half of which went to charities supporting children.  He gave out his own money after national tragedies, including  $2000. to families affected by the Boston bombing, $2,000. to the Sandy Hook Promise Foundation after the mass shooting at the elementary school there.  The $1.1 million of donations Obama declared on his tax returns also do not include the $1.4 million he directed the Nobel Committee to give 10 charities after he won the Nobel Peace Prize in 2009. <br/><br/>Will we ever seen evidence of the current president's charitable giving if indeed there has been any?  It's doubtful since we'll never see his tax returns.<br/><br/>Finally, however, I see a $400,000. honorarium as compensation for the grief, non cooperation and slurs he endured at the hand of republicans during his eight years in office, an administration which unlike many others was scandal free. Bully for Barack Obama. <br/><br/><a href="https://www.forbes.com/sites/danalexander/2017/02/06/obama-donated-over-1-million-to-charity-as-president-heres-where-the-money-went/#7dd5b60e459e" title="https://www.forbes.com/sites/danalexander/2017/02/06/obama-donated-over-1-million-to-charity-as-president-heres-where-the-money-went/#7dd5b60e459e" target="_blank">https://www.forbes.com/sites/danalexander/2017/02/06/obama-donated-over-...</a>
"why not elevate a new generation of political leaders and stay true to his values by giving his speech fees to his foundation and other charities focused on those goals?"<br/><br/>Exactly. I hope he will.
I have a great admiration for President Obama, and on the whole believe he left the nation in much better shape than he inherited it. However, my biggest criticism of his administration was the soft-glove approach in which they handled the financial industry in the wake of the 2008 crash. <br/><br/>The recklessness and greed of Wall Street created the largest economic crash in generations. They collectively committed the largest case of fraud in history. Yet, their punishments were minuscule relative to the magnitude of the destruction they caused. Millions of Americans were financially destroyed, yet the banks paid a pittance in fines, and the majority of the economic gains of the past years have all gone to the banks and the 1%.<br/><br/>In light of this, how can we not see this speech as a token of quid pro quo? <br/><br/>We need a government that is completely separate from the influence of money. At present, we have an oligarchy, where both parties play lip-service to the needs of the majority of Americans, yet allow their pockets to be stuffed by billionaires, corporate interests, and the financial industry. Their votes and policies follow accordingly, while the rest of us struggle harder with less and only receiving the occasional table scrap. That is inexcusable, and it must end. <br/><br/>Enough is Enough!
Per this editorial, former Presidents have been earning top dollar by making use of the opportunities afforded their unique experience and expertise for nearly as long as Presidential candidates have provided their tax returns for scrutiny. Ronald Reagan, the modern day Lincoln for the GOP, earned $2 million for two speeches given to Japan, and that's $2 million in the late 1980's. <br/><br/>President Obama seems to be held to a far higher standard that the other Presidents, even out of office. Why is it a big deal that he earned a high dollar amount for his speech? Is he supposed to live in squalor just because he speaks intelligently and cares about the common man? <br/><br/>President Obama put in his time, paid his dues and then some. He suffered a number of indignities that few other Presidents have had to endure, yet handled them with grace and wisdom. Let the man go on vacation with whomever he pleases and earn whatever he likes. <br/><br/>We now have a President, who has questionable ties to Russia, golfs almost every weekend at one of his many golf courses, houses his wife in their gold-plated high-rise apartment in a different state, and charges the American people with paying for it all, including golf carts for his Secret Service bodyguards. This is the person deserving of your criticism, outrage, and judgment. If the Obama family did one-fourth of what the Trump family has done/is doing, impeachment would've been fast and vicious.<br/><br/>Let President Obama breathe and enjoy life. 
Amazing how problematic longstanding traditions become when an African American derives benefit from it.  Until now, it's been "just the way it is" and  white Americans who hold equally as impressive credentials as Mr. &amp; Mrs. Obama are viewed as reaping the benefits of their labor and a return on their educational and professional investments.  Clearly, based on the sentiments of this article, a significant infusion of minorities into the 1% may be what is needed to finally annoy Americans enough to resolve their deference to the group pushing the middle class into extinction.  If the article wants to tout the assumption that the Democratic Party is out of touch, then it should also point to the fact that the GOP proved to be just as out of touch when 300+ Republicans of the Electoral College elected an unqualified billionaire to the White House and has done nothing to stop any of his millionaire and billionaire appointments to the Cabinet.  Trump is not "everyday people", he is an Ivy League-educated billionaire, who has filled the Cabinet with millionaires and billionaires who have nothing in common with average Americans.  Interesting how increasingly more acceptable bad behavior becomes when the race of the perpetrator(s) changes.
Presidents get a lot of garbage thrown at them, 24/7 for 4 or 8 years.<br/>100% of what Trump gets is deserved.<br/>80% of what GW Bush got was deserved.<br/>50% of what Clinton got was deserved.<br/>40% of what Bush '41 got was deserved.<br/>110% of what Reagan SHOULD have gotten was deserved.<br/>30% of what Jimmy Carter got was deserved.<br/>But no more than 10% of what Obama got was deserved and for the toll it took out of him, he deserves to be able to make some big bucks from it.
Why all the attention to a $400,000 payment but much less attention to the lower and no-fee presentations that Mr. Obama makes?  Regardless of the amount he receives Mr. Obama has interesting and valuable experiences to share with the public.<br/><br/>An important factor in the setting of fees is that higher fees discourage an avalanche of requests for appearances.  Public figures such as Mr. Obama are in high demand so they often set high fees as a filter to reduce the number of requests.  
For those who say he served us well for eight years and deserves the money, or that everyone else has done it, so why shouldn't he, I say shame on you. <br/><br/>The office he held was the most important in the world and he was an amazing president.  He can continue to inspire, motivate and provide hope, not by cashing in and crassly becoming one of "them", but rather by not cashing in (a little late given the book deal), and setting an example for all.<br/><br/>He spoke for years about public service, giving oneself to government and charity and the benefit to the person as well as the public from such service.  Now its time for him to follow his own mantra and to hold up his public service as a means by which one can give back, rather than a get rich scheme. <br/><br/>He can start by giving his speech money to charity.  
All Obama needs to do to clean this up is to pledge that the full text of any compensated speech he gives -- to any group -- will be made public a given number of months after the speech is delivered. Transparency is the answer, and a delay before publication of a specified (but not overly lengthy) amount of time will meet the desire of speech sponsors to provide something "exclusive" to their audience.
It's a little ridiculous to see some of those commenting explain Obama's payday away by claiming that the Trumps are cashing in more, are more wealthy or corrupt, etc... There's no comparison - we all held Obama to a higher standard and believed, despite disappointments and reality checks, that he held himself to a higher standard, too. Evidently he doesn't - his accepting this ridiculous pay day suggests that not only is he as much of a sell-out as any other former president, but that (rhetoric aside) he probably never had any integrity to begin with when it came to Wall Street and widening inequality. The suggestions that he NEEDS to enrich himself personally to be charitable, or that "he's earned it," are absurd. <br/><br/>The disappointing thing, then, is that Obama really was no different than the Clintons, Gerald Ford, or any other politician who used their office to cash in. In the age of Trump, when most of us are seeking some one to look up to, he let us down.
It depends on what he says to them. A leader would speak to any crowd to get his or her point across. In Hillary Clinton's speech to Wall Street, she said she feared she had lost touch with the common person. That should be lauded as an honest moment of self awareness that perhaps gave other people in the room something to ponder. I am not a big fan of hers, but that type of statement in itself, does not betray the poor or working class. I wonder of the self awareness of the current "President".
Money in politics is undoubtedly bad to the extent it's anti democratic and corrupts our system. But taking money for speeches is hardly the place to draw the line. Speaking fees for those at the highest echelons are routinely in the low to mid six figures. There's a lot of money in corporate America, and there's a willingness to spend a tiny portion to hear views from important people. <br/><br/>I'm much more concerned with the outsized influence of money on our current president. Has anyone noticed the odd, almost knee jerk Trump support for autocrats in Turkey and the Philippines, not to mention Russia? <br/><br/>I'm sure his known business interests there have no bearing on supporting these thugs. And I also have a Trump branded bridge I'm selling in Azerbaijan, no strings attached.
What a shame women (Clinton) and Obama are held up to a totally different standard. I remember when Reagan received $2 million, do the critics on here have amnesia?   What do you think Kerry gets, or even Bush, Clinton or Carter?  <br/><br/>He is a private citizen who will stay that way.  Trump isn't even waiting to enrich his family totally in conflict of interests. Not a peep. 
I agree strongly with the premise of this oped. If we want others to hold to a higher standard, we must insist our own hold that standard first. Obama is making a mistake by accepting these gigantic fees for speeches. If Hillary's loss isn't enough proof of that, I can't imagine what would be. 
He's just doing what many former president's have done.  And if that were the norm at the moment then Drumpf would have released his tax returns.  It is really that simple.  
I agree with those commentators who point out that we do not yet know how the Obamas's will use their recently acquired wealth. I do recall Robert Hutchins' self-recriminations about the impact on him of a life spent soliciting money--even for a good cause. AGB
I love how the free market is lauded as a wonderful model, unless someone decides they don't like someone else getting rich.  Sorry - it's the law of supply and demand.  He is one person and many people want to hear from him.  It's not like he's going to stop giving "free" speeches.  He deserves every cent, and knowing the Obamas most of it will go to his foundation or other charitable causes.  I'd rather the money go there then into the coffers of these organizations. 
The best part of this editorial was the microscopic reference to President Carter. During his presidency he was much maligned but his life has been exemplary in its service to others. He is a quiet American hero. You will find him working to improve the lot of the poor and neglected part of society every day. Obama had the rhetoric but he has joined the rest of the past presidents in his deafening gobbling at the elites' trough. I'm sure buying a president or past president must be the ultimate thrill. Anyone can own a yacht.
This is a silly and manufactured controversy and your editorial is ridiculous.  I'm glad that Obama is talking to Wall Street and I hope they will actually listen to him.  And if he, as a private citizen, makes a few bucks  out of the deal that's good too.  Why shouldn't he?  This idea that somehow it's evil to talk to certain people or evil to make money is absurd.  If Obama suddenly starts lobbying for Citibank then you might have something to complain about, but even then it might be good to actually hear what he has to say before condemning him.  Wall Street isn't going anywhere anytime soon.  I appreciate gadflies like Elizabeth Warren who dog the financial sector and refuse to let them get away with anything, but we also need people who can try to achieve the same goals by talking with and working with Wall Street.
Why should Barack Obama be the pure one? Especially when thanks to Scalia SCOTUS &amp; Citizens United, having money is equivalent to controlling political power. Why shouldn't Democrats also have money? And why shouldn't Hillary Clinton have commanded $200K for a speech when she was the most important woman on the planet. Why shouldn't Obama command $400K for a speech when having him at a function enhances the value of that function. And maybe they would learn something too, rather than only listen to those paid off by the Kochs, Adelson, etc. Sick of progressives destroying Democrats ability to win election over a purity test. That's what gave us Trump.
And what is Obama peddling besides a narrative? We can agree his Wall Street speech may not make for great optics but at least it fits comfortably within the norms established by his predecessors. Compared to the open sewer of self-dealing and corporate giveaways that is the Trump Administration there's little to complain about here.  
Why should Obama have to set an example.  Didn't Reagan accept<br/>ridiculous amounts of money for speeches after he left the<br/>White House?  
And this is why Jimmy Carter is still my favorite president of my voting lifetime.
How is he hurting anyone?  Why aren't we focused on the clear emoluments clause conflicts of the current first family?  
I just don't understand why it is OK to ask our first African-American president to forgo the opportunities that every other president has benefited from.   I will be more sympathetic to your suggestion after a few of our white presidents do as you suggest.  We could begin with our current president who appears to be making a bundle of money while in office.  
I am more interested in what he has to say to them than what he is paid. Lets wait and see that before we condemn him.
Compared to the drool coming out of the current interloper in crook- Trump- Obama could charge several million and appearance and very much look like a good investment.  As Trump proves on a daily bungling basis- obviously the acumen required to run the many functions of government is not something that grows on trees (or in his case, crawls out from under rocks.).
The Republicans who are condemning Obama's $400,000 fee for his speech are perhaps jealous.  Trump gives speeches that are worth what---$4?
During the 2008 crisis, Obama's administration was concerned with saving Wall Street to the exclusion of the rest of the the USA and on the backs of the tax payers. Now Wall Street is returning the favor.
The upper 1% did great under Obama. It is payback time. Stock market doubled, most of the new wealth went to the already rich. 3 cheers for the progressive President! 
Obama has always adhered to liberalism, not social democracy. Why does this surprise so many people? 
That the leader of the free world is paid a tiny fraction of a CEO's annual pay speaks to the cynical morality that expects our elected leaders to sacrifice in order to serve to the people -- while millions are funneled into campaign warchests. <br/><br/>I wish I could work up the outrage necessary to castigate the first president since (help me out here ... Truman?) to have 8 scandal free years. (Eisenhower had Sherman Adams, so no.)<br/><br/>Meanwhile, the NYT, in search of fairness, hires a climate change denialist, participates in the pillorying of Hillary ( those emails!), and takes to the pulpit against Obama's speaking fees. <br/><br/>Keep the focus please on the issues that actually affect us in the current administration. Going to guess Obama will continue to support his family and foundation by doing precisely what he is doing now. Or must he take a minimum wage job to keep his good guy credentials?
I cannot believe this editorial and the accompanying comments!<br/>First, the NYT Editorial Board apparently assumes that the fee will NOT go to a charity or an organization dedicated to protect civil liberties, the environment, etc. How can the Board and commentaries assume that the funds won't be used for something truly admirable?<br/>Second, does the Board know what he is going to say to the Wall St. audience? Maybe it is something the audience should hear, ponder and perhaps decide to support good causes with their money?<br/>Third, our sacred capitalism operates by the supply and demand theory. There will be many organizations and members of the top 1% who will pay large sums to hear this great man? $400,000.00 to firms like Goldman Sachs is a drop in the ocean of its obscene profits.<br/>Should Obama make sure he only speaks for people who are vetted as perfect Democrats and only charge $500.00 or speak for nothing? Hate to tell you this, but there exist some very good, generous Wall Street people. How do you know if he is not talking to them? I'm ashamed of the NYT and Sen. Warren! The assumptions here are ignorant and judgmental with little knowledge of the facts. Why don't you trust a man who has shown nothing but intelligence, honor and compassion to the citizen's of this country? 
[[He wrestled with what it means to be a representative public servant in an era of purchased influence.]]<br/><br/>Again...I wish you people would throw away the writer's crutch "in an era of."<br/><br/>Political influence has always been purchased...this is not a special "era."<br/><br/>The problem is most politicians can be bought for a few thousand dollars to throw a vote or grant a permit and they explain away their actions by saying "everyone does it" or by saying they are underpaid.<br/><br/>Democrats need more fire in the belly and they need candidates who, unlike Hillary Clinton, don't need to be scripted or programmed at the start of each day.
"The tens of millions that Hillary Clinton raised from speaking to corporate interests most likely haunts her now — or should."<br/><br/>I thought it was Comey who cost her the election?
Very false equivalence.  Mr. Obama is a FORMER president.  The current office holder and his entire entourage is using the office NOW for profit.  Bigly.  That is corruption on a colossal, and global scale. Low class, tacky and typical GOP privilege.
Seriously. You sit in a padded board room/plush office, makeing a nice salary, working for one of the standard bearer Media companies, and criticize the most articulate president we have had in many years from accepting a speakers fee? And you do so hiding behind the by-line of editorial board? Seriously? (Eye-roll) What's he supposed to do? Take a vow of poverty? A lot of good can be done with fees like that. And he has earned the right to collect them.
As an event organizer for many years, paid speaking gigs are part and parcel of the work we all do.  George W and George , Sr. along with the Clintons, Newt Gingrich and many former pols, as well as pundits (no doubt the one writing here) all command hefty fees and still do, although the amounts paid wane over time...Is it because we expect the "black president" to give up what every other president has done, because we hold him, once again, to some standard he didn't ask to be held to?  Here's the deal/ As someone who has booked these guys (and rarely gals)...There is no special access or ask.  They are paid through speakers bureaus and have no more access to someone in the company than the man in the moon.  Barack Obama has access to alot of people, with or without paid speaking gigs... The money is the money...amd what the current market is paying to speakers of his caliber and prominence... Don't worry, like all past presidents, authors, pundits - he's making hay while the sun shines.   Lets get rid of citizens united... That's  the true pay for play crime.
Did you ask Barack Obama what he will do with the fees he is receiving?   According to this article "The Obamas are starting a foundation whose work will include “training and elevating a new generation of political leaders in America.”" Perhaps he will put this money to work in his foundation.   Or perhaps he will give it to Planned Parenthood?    Would this make you less judgemental?
I love how you describe blatant corruption as "unseemly attachment to the party’s wealthiest donors".<br/><br/>The Democratic party should drop the charade because the people aren't buying it. They represent coastal elites (Wall Street and Silicon Valley) with a fig leaf of identity politics. Voters don't pick the candidate, the wealthy donors do.<br/><br/>Even their own lawyer Bruce Spiva describes them as an undemocratic mafia "we could have voluntarily decided that, Look, we’re gonna go into back rooms like they used to and smoke cigars and pick the candidate that way".<br/><br/>Bill Clinton, Al Gore and the rest of the DLC were responsible for turning the Democratic party in the party of Wall Street and they, not Putin, are the reason why the Blue Wall crumbled and Trump is president. It's time the NYT called a spade a spade.
Bernie Sanders would not have.
"The Democratic Party is out of touch with ordinary Americans" ... umm.. the Republican Party isn't?  Please remember that based on polls we tend to hold all Congress in contempt.<br/>  I am a lot less uneasy about the $400k than I am about WH nepotism; curious flows of money, foreign agents in the WH, etc.<br/>   I am sure that Obama is getting as much as all the other past black Presidents we have had.  Oh wait ... not much of supply there.
Most of the commenters here are the same Party loyalists who always defend their side at the neglect of intellectual honesty.  Those who so closely identify with their “betters” and idolize them so lovingly are a small sliver of the electorate. I give you liberals – not the left. The DEMS will continue to lose until they stop identifying with wealth and power.  Just because you can make hundreds of millions of dollars after being a public “servant” – doesn’t mean you should.  This sort of unapologetic greed – is immoral and it’s destroying any notion of democracy or fair play.  The fact is – Obama took it wonderfully easy on Wall Street and every corporation under the sun, including the fossil fuel industry. He and his wife will be made extraordinarly wealthy as a result of the choices he made while in office. Do the math – it’s not hard to understand – it’s staring you in the face, but too many people choose to ignore it because it upsets their own worldview or their sense of identification with all these beautiful people.  We have Trump because Obama did not live up to his “brand,” nor did the DEM Party that he “leads.” Read Thomas Frank if you want to understand what’s been happening.  Obama pulled the mask off the whole rigged system for anyone to see if they were honest.  He’s doing now what he’s always done – taking care of his friends and neighbors and future employers.  HRC and Bill did the same (and GWB etc.)  The DEMS are just as corrupt as the GOP – face it. 
Former President Obama is a human being (and a fine one).  He is not a saint.  
As someone who voted for Mr Obama twice I don't get it. The family is pulling in $65 million, why give \Obama haters an excuse for impugning his reputation for, after taxes, what is maybe $250,000 grand of relative chump change? Maybe the Hillary greed rubbed off on him.
So what?  This is outrage in search of an offense.
Maybe, just maybe, he has something to say to this elite, protected class of individuals - as did Hillary. 
When is enough, enough, Mr. and Mrs. Obama?  You are already wealthy beyond most people's dreams. You set a high example in the White House and people still look to you and your family for moral leadership.  You have started your post-presidency on the wrong foot and are sending a message of greed. Very disheartening. 
Hmmm....if the Clintons accumulated approx. $250 M, how long before Obama is a billionaire? 
The naiveté of the Editorial Board regarding Mr. Obama's 400,000 fee is mind-boggling. Unitl one remembers that the United States is, after all, a very young nation, simple sometimes, like a child in a very material moment: literal, sequential. logical. But unsubtle and kind of clunky.<br/>First, the people in Wall Street Mr. Obama intends to address might just sit up and listen for 400,000 dollars (and a polite earful they will get). For a few dollars less, they would slouch and look at their phones. For free, they would scoff. The money is the muscle, with those people. I would charge them 750,000.<br/>Second, you can rely on the Obama family to know how to be rich. They have impeccable taste, very few evident vices and do not appear to be addicted to luxury or collecting. So the more money they get, the more they will do with it.<br/>Third, the Editorial Board is willing to go along with a symbolic act, that Obama speak for free, but that is one of the worst traps liberals get into: accepting the symbolic but not insisting on the real. The malfeasance of Wall Street, the 85,000 children in New York City that are homeless, the Times lives with that. But Obama's speaking fee, let's fuss.<br/>I think it fair, as a reader of half a century of this fine newspaper, to ask that the members of the board get out a little more into the real world. Up at the top they are isolated and out of touch. They play with symbols and let the big things slip by. I want more from the Times.  
What a silly editorial.  If people want to pay $400,000 to hear Mr. Obama speak, that is their business, not anyone else's.  He is a private citizen, and not in a position to misuse governmental office.   
"Is it a betrayal.....Perhaps not..."<br/><br/>Or yeah, it is. Barack Obama has never been interested in making Americans richer, by raising our standard of living. The only way to do that is to embrace laissez-faire capitalism - he chose to embrace crony capitalism, in order to keep funding his political coffers and the coffers of the corrupt Democratic Party. <br/><br/>Happily, he and Michelle haven't yet claimed poverty like the Clintons. Hopefully he and Michelle didn't shoplift anything from the White House like the Clintons. But you cannot accept 6-figure fees and still say you're one of the 99%.
Could it be he is raising capital to fund his future foundation? 
The only statement I agree with in this editorial is that the current occupants of the White House are vulgar. Otherwise, it's shockingly tone deaf.
Are you trying to be fake objective?  Focus on Trump.  Trump is the problem.  Trump Trump Trump.
What is happening with the NYT editorial policy? Normalizing Trump, punishing anti-science climate Scott m scepticism, and now this? 
What a loathsome editorial. The Obamas have every right and the motive to accept pay for speaking engagements. Did The NY Times miss the part about that's what ex presidents do? Suddenly, Obama has to be held to a different standard? I trust the man, I trust he will do great things in the future and I do not fault him for making money. At least he'll be doing honestly as compared to the current occupant in our White House. 
It seems to be a near-consensus among the commentators and recommenders that the fact Obama is taking 400k from the 1% for a speech (as “soaring”, “rousing” and “cerebral” as his message surely is), is either a SOP for ex-presidents (except the out of touch with reality J. Carter) and thus irrelevant for evaluating his legacy and moral standings, or, in the eyes of his admirers, that Obama accepting WS fees is actually a display of his unique capabilities to balance and merge noble ambition with the necessities of living in a hyper-capitalist society.<br/>Historians and philosophers will judge Trump’s ascendance to the presidency as derivation, if not as a direct result, of Obama’s abrogating on virtually the essence of all the hopes and aspirations that carried him to the Presidency endowed with unprecedented power for change (a word which he put in parenthesis for the foreseeable future). Come 2018 and 2020, Democrats will find that this despicable acceptance of fake-morality and the rape of integrity by their acknowledged value-leader will shatter their hopes for escaping Trump’s world.
How can anyone judge at this point in time?  Let's wait and see what the Obamas do with the proceeds.  My expectation is that it will be something meaningful. 
Further evidence that in post-racial America the only color is green.
I woke up expecting a scathing editorial on Trump inviting Duterte to the White House, then promoting his new Manila hotel with Ivana in the ads. Instead, a ridiculous critique of Obama accepting speaking fees, because suddenly that's the problem. Once again, Obama   - or any woman - has to be saintly and self-effacing, but the white male grifter and his family gets a different standard.
Good Grief!  Why shouldn't Obama take what is offered to him?  Our current "president" still runs his businesses (through his sons), bilks taxpayers out of millions with his trips to Mar-a-lago, is a proven con man and sexual predator, etc. etc. etc. and he gets away with everything.  President Obama, on the other hand, ran an honest administration.  Now that he is beholden to no one, he can do what he likes.  After 8 years of dealing with the miserable  Republicans, he has earned it.  
It is totally expected that Obama will begin doing what Hillary Clinton did. Anyone who believes he is some sort of shining savior is delusional. He spends all his time with billionaires on golf courses and private islands. These are the people he prefers to associate with. Isnt that the standard by which one is typically judged?
This outrage about Obama accepting large speaking fees after his Presidency completely baffles and angers me. <br/><br/>As stated in your Editorial, "But why not elevate a new generation of political leaders and stay true to his values by giving his speech fees to his foundation and other charities focused on those goals?" <br/><br/>First of all - How do you know what he intends to do with any money that he earns?  What makes you think that he will not give generously to his foundation and other charities?  And second - Why is it that a Democrat is only considered true to their values if they have little money?  Why, in your standard, can't a Democrat earn large sums of money and still stay to their values, as I fully expect the Obamas to do<br/><br/>What a double standard you impose.  Shameful New York Times. 
"and it shows surprising tone deafness" Surprising? This was a surprise only to The NY Times. To Trump supporters and a majority of the country, this speech and the others that will follow, along with the 'donations' aka 'influence peddling'  using the coming political foundation, are entirely predictable. To defy expectations among the skeptics, all Mr Obama had to do was take the Carter route, set up a foundation th raise educational outcomes for African American inner city kids.... create a foundation  to stop inner city carnage  ( not through gun control) or improve health outcomes for families with avoidable diseases such as diabetes. Unfortunately none of these can harvest the financial and political returns that will keep him as the defacto leader of the Democrat party. His actions are indeed completely predictable and yet another betrayal of his acolytes who expected much from this shallow, self serving predictable man.
"worries and resentments of the other 99%"?<br/>The guy lived off resentments. Very hard for me to see these creeps as detached from the meal ticket as this article suggests. 
It cost him my respect!
The Times' position here is difficult to understand. This is not about ethics since Mr. Obama is clearly done with electoral politics hence being paid for his time is hardly the quid for some pro quo. Instead, the Times would hold him to an arbitrary standard where one corporation paying Mr. and Ms. Obama $65 Million for their memoirs is acceptable, but another paying $400,000 to hear Mr. Obama render some part of the same narrative in spoken form is lamentable. I realize the pen is mightier than the sword, but wither the spoken word?  
Money seduces. Period. Bi-partisan fact.
Seriously why is it that Barack Obama is the only one who isn't allowed to make money after being president.  Lets play an old Sesame Street game -- which one of these isn't like the others, which one of these doesn't belong....?
Just wait until DJT is out of office and see what he charges (for speeches that lack complete sentences).
Why is HE the scandal?  So the Times can be "fair and balanced"?  How considerate of him, then, to accept more for a speech than the Times thinks he should be paid, and give the paper the chance to pillory a Democrat.  What an Alice in Wonderland world when the Times stands for the right of a white supremacist to speak on a campus that doesn't want him, but against a manifestly honest President accepting more for a speech than carfare.  THAT'S your response to the corruption and First Amendment issues of the Trump era?  Sad.
From Australia, it seems incomprehensible that past presidents and near-presidents could charge such a ludicrous amount of money. What pearls of wisdom do they have that are worth so much ?. Yes, the book will have anecdotes that the "internet" does not already know.  But $ 65m ??. Wow. !. Here, a few years ago a past prime minister's memoirs started at $ 49.95 and quickly fell ignobly to $ 4.95 and was later given away for free as a promo. !!!. It is time the American population realize the value of ahem.. money... !!!
Let's see if he donates the $400K to feed the hungry, shelter the homeless and help the disabled or to vacation away from hoi polloi.
Truman refused to use the office to enrich himself and was broke most of the time after he left office.  Of course the infestation of money now would demand almost super-human character to refuse.  And we don't produce that kind anymore.  Obama has cheapened himself and now swims with the vulgarians.  Well done Barack.
President Obama did set a higher standard...in office.<br/>And, you folks gave him little or no credit for it.<br/>And that's my question: Why did the media give Obama little or no credit for setting a higher standard?<br/>Why?
Barrack "Dont Call Me Barry" Obama always came across to me as a man of royalist intentions.<br/>He "deserved" to lead the country....some sort of odd Pilgrim-heritage divine right to providential leadership of a nation that needs to repent in the eyes of God.<br/>Sadly, in reality, he did anything little different from his Pilgrim heritage predecessor, George W Bush.  Honestly, I can see little difference between the two.  I suspect that if some Tax Bill Scam, mascarading as "health care reform" came across Dubya's desk....he would have signed it too!<br/>ACA become law on the anniversary date of the infamous Stamp Act in 1765....think about THAT for a moment.<br/>As for "Change you can Believe In"......that turns out to have all the heart-felt sincerity of "Let them Eat Cake"......likely with similar results............
Obama should do as Van Jones suggested - go on  a poverty tour. For every $400,000 speech give a half-price $200,000 speech to poor children.
In a world where a man of no learning and poor taste can get paid millions to stick his name on a building, $400,000 seems pretty fair to listen to a man of intellect, learning, and experience. I think the NY Times has better things to worry about. 
And here the left will again get all tangled up in purity knots, tripping over their two left feet, and hand the country over to Donald Trump. <br/><br/>Sad!
This is much ado about nothing. The Obamas have every right to earn money speaking, writing books or any other legal endeavor they choose to pursue. The media needs to back off as do all critics. Who are you to pass judgment. Your halos are on way too tight.<br/><br/>Being the type of people they are, I wouldn't be the least bit surprised if the Obamas use some of their earnings to help others. Bottom line? It's none of our business. Write about something that is important and actually matters.
Shame on the Obama's.  Rahm Emmanuel, drones, kill lists, no banks in jail, bush and cheney not in jail, caving to big Pharma insurance and docs, abandoning 9 million Obama-bots just after his first election.  What's not to like ?<br/>Unless you are a democrat or independent that expected MUCH more from hope and change.<br/>I agree with the article the Dems are on thin ice, and should be, given their overwhelmingly mediocre record of party-building throughout Obama's time in office.  ALEC and the Kochs and Adelson and Mercer's are kicking butt and not taking names.  It certainly seems time to forget the Dems and sign up for the new/old Progressive party of Bernie, Ellison, Merkley, et al that don't exist for the top 10%.<br/>Republicans are rancid, but the existing Dems aren't far behind.
People want to believe in the myth that somehow Obama is some god like entity that is above it all, and not sullied by the filth that is politics. Well, folks, he is a politician, and as such is up for sale to the highest bidder. He can criticize Wall Street and all of the greedy people there, but in the end, the more zeros there are on the check, the more palatable they become. Everyone has a price, and his is $400K. 
You're sounding like Inspector Reynaud, "I'm shocked! Shocked, I tell you!"  You forgot that Candidate Obama took more campaign money from Wall Street than any other presidential candidate in history?  The only decent president we ever had (in my lifetime) was Jimmy Carter who was hounded out of office by his own party (Democrats) because he wouldn't be a puppet and let them run the show.  This is the same reason the Dems destroyed prez. nominations for Howard Dean and Bernie Sanders.  They did the same thing in 2008 to Hillary Clinton, but I'm surmising she drank the Kool-Aid this time around and agreed to let them run the show.  
The Democratic Party might be out of touch with working Americans because it gets its cues from the kinds of media that use phrases like "workaday vulgarity"--which seems lifted from the mouth of a minor aristocrat in a Jane Austen novel--to sum up an administration that those same working Americans still strongly support. This is an editorial discussing why Democrats have fallen out of touch with ordinary Americans. Where was the optics editor on this one?
If anyone living in todays' world presumes the Obamas, the Clintons, the Bushes, and the Trumps, et al, cares one whit what anyone has to say about their insatiable avarice and their love affair of wealth, regardless the source, they are deluded and living in a fairytale reality.<br/><br/>Inequality, and the wanton endless drive by the elites to maintain it, regardless the suffering of the masses, eventually leads to revolution, followed by chaos, then the rise of individuals / groups purporting to be, and believing to be, the latest savior, creating law as the modern- day guillotine to end the most egregious inequality, saiting the anger, until they themselves are corrupted by the power bestowed on them, leading, in time, to an almost exact duplication of the inequality they sought to end.<br/><br/>Such is life on this planet; humankind is no different than the animals in the wild, albeit much more sophisticated as they follow their instinctual drive to survive.<br/><br/>Empathy and concern are aberrant traits.
Obama has demonstrated that he is for sale just like the other politicians.
Interesting how the word Clinton doesn't appear.  <br/><br/>The Times Editorial Board lavished praise on Bill and Hillary. They accepted advertising from (by the way did the Times charge for the "I'm with Her" ads?). The Times endorsed both Clintons. The Clintons are the most egregious example of gold digging greed in post electoral life in history. Now the Times finds that practice unacceptable.<br/><br/>Since you brought him up, LBJ never had a non Government job in his life. His first government job was as a public school teacher. His last job was as President. The man never made more than $200,000 in his life. He managed to die with an estate valued somewhere near $100,000,000 in current terms. <br/><br/>Gerald Ford didn't start the practice. <br/><br/>And by the way... like a president's taxes, there's no law that limits a private citizen from making as much money as she or he can.  
Let' see what he does with his money.....
What is the problem of obama being a capitalist?  
$400,000.00, for a few hours of work genuflecting to Wall Street firm. Substitute teacher in northern Michigan, 7:45 a.m. until 3:00 p.m., without a paid lunch, or break. Students are court ordered to attend this particular school program, highly compromised, clinically depressed, lifetime of marginalization, generally feeling extreme hopelessness. Daily stipend, $70.00. You are Mr. President a traitor. You have given the people across this state another reason to vote Republican, although the students in this program were pro-democratic young people. But this is a rarity, Your behavior  since leaving office is ethically unhealthy, bordering on creepy. 
The unprecedented "tone deafness" is actually coming from the neoliberal elites, including the writers of this tone-deaf editorial, who deliberately skirt the clear contrast between Secretary Clinton's UNETHICAL pay-to-play circuit *before* running for President, and President Obama's ETHICAL play and win, again and again—and then get paid—approach. What's also unprecedented is the rush to judge the First Black President (no, not Bill Clinton) for earning his market value following years of squeaky-clean public service. The resentment toward Obama for daring to defeat beloved New Democrat Hillary is at the core of this attack, as was, I believe, the nomination of Tim Kaine for VP rather than a minority. This is another slap-in-the-face to the Obama legacy and the dream of post-racial America from a white establishment that still wants to punish an "uppity" black man for demanding, exceeding and earning an equal place among the 1% club.  We Democrats truly are our own worst enemy.
The Obamas love to be rich. They love stardom They are surrounded by billionaires. They live in the most exclusive area in Washington DC. They spend weeks on private islands, wear only the most expensive clothing and play the finest golf courses in the world. In short, they are no different than anyone else. Who wouldn't want to be part of the 1%?<br/>You didn't really believe that whole "Audacity of Hope" thing did you? That was all politics.
Anyone who wishes to participate in activities to assist the needy and benefit the environment must have funding.  Modern communications involves media ads that cost money.  Participating in lobbying efforts involves money.  If Obama at some point wants to fund a charitable foundation like the Clintons or Bill Gates, it will require LOTS of money.<br/><br/>Idealistically, one can visualize Jesus wandering through the countryside and standing up on a hill calling out his message to the eager throngs and feeding them with miraculous loaves and fishes.  Not only is that approach geographically limited but Obama doesn't have the miracle powers of a Deity.  He will need funding to accomplish virtually anything and he'll have the freedom to do what he wants for charity if he raises it on his own.<br/><br/>As soon as Obama starts a business that screws his subcontractors out of their promised payments because he doesn't want to pay them, then I'll be critical
It's funny how highly paid speaking engagements only became morally problematic when a certain boss lady in a pantsuit  - the most admired woman in the world - accepted fees worth her value.  Now it's a problem when an African American ex-President does it. Previously, it was seen as an appropriate sign of appreciation to hear remarkable people speak.  The undertones of racism and sexism in the Times' pronouncement (and certain Democrat leaders as well) is disheartening.  And - unlike many ex-Presidents - the Obamas are not people of means and are still young.  So - what job, what mode of deriving income would be acceptable to all the naysayers?  Should he go back to community organizing?  The chutzpah in criticizing smacks more of schadenfreude than substance.
My guess is he will use such fees to assist others!  Maybe give him some time to show where he is going?  It is certainly not appropriate to compare Mr. Obama to Mrs. Clinton or the lunatic currently occupying the White House.  
Let's leave Hillary aside, as other commentators have addressed this NY Times hypocrisy, but Bill Clinton used his speaker earnings, in part, to support Clinton Global Initiative and, I believe, parts of the Clinton Library's operation (and, ahem, pay off some legal bills).  Obama is out of office; he is a private citizen; he's earned the right to earn what he can, and I have no doubt he will use some of his earnings to support valuable causes - helping build the next generation of leaders - rather than, say, finance garish, gold-plated hotels emblazoned with his name.  The moralistic scolds of the Times editorial board should save their clucking and finger-wagging for real abuses of power that produce pernicious results.  I trust the Obamas will continue to comport themselves with the integrity, grace and commitment to our country's improvement they have unflaggingly demonstrated - even without the guidance of the Times' editorial board.
We never begrudge Republicans, only Democrats. Apparently Hilary Clinton committed the crime of the century (and the millenium) when she accepted speaking fees after being Secretary of State. But Republicans-- perfectly fine. We now have our so-called President and his royal family gorging themselves on the public trough, giving the middle finger to all of us who care about conflicts, ethics, and corruption. His adoring crowds cheer this on like goose stepping in Nuremberg-- after all, he's giving it to the elites. He and his cabinet stocked with Goldman Saks-ers. But Barack and Hilary -- they take money for speeches. And those emails!
Why the heck do Democrats always have to be the adults in the room?  Why do we always have to set the "good" example - be the noble ones?  I'm tired of it.  Mr. Obama would be a fool not to take $400,000 dollars - before taxes of course - for a couple of hours work.  Why not?  My only regret is that no one wants to pay me that kind of money.  If the oh so pure hyper progressive snowflakes in the Democratic party can't see how ridiculous their reactions to this are, then tough nuggies.  They deserve to be hung up alongside the rest of the antiques in grandma's curiosity shop.
I am shocked that the editorial board makes the accusation that Obama does not "stay true to his values" by accepting pay for work.  His conduct throughout his career has been exemplary.  It seems like a cheap shot to criticize him for not giving his earnings away.  If he were really mercenary, he wouldn't be spending his time with a foundation training future political leaders.  He should be strongly commended, not criticized nor damned with faint praise.
First, a majority of Americans just voted away his legacy.  He has been unfairly criticized and disrespected, and I am talking about the left just as much as the right.  And the public did not support him strongly over the years when obstructionism, including over a supreme court seat, was blatant.  Instead criticizing him as ineffective.  He could have been the vector for so much more - and he wanted to be.  But he couldn't do it alone. And Americans are apparently over 50% idiots, actively or passively.  Conclusion: Obama is too good for you.  And he should not care what you think. <br/><br/>Second: I am sure his charitable giving exceeds $400,000/yr.  Why not take from the rich and give to the poor?  For a stupid speech.  What do you think the speech from an ex-president will do exactly?  Some purchased prestige for an evening?  Rather look at what Trump is doing with his GS cabinet.
And this is why the left continues to eat its own.  Obama can't ever be president again.   He did not come into the presidency wealthy like a Bush or a Reagan, he had student loans into his 40s.  If the man only cared about money he could have been a rainmaking corporate attorney instead of becoming a law professor and community activist.  
Hey, he's gotta keep Michelle in the lifestyle to which she's become accustomed ... notwithstanding Bernie and Elizabeth W.'s warnings about Wall Street co-opting politicians.
Obama's years in office —and nearly his entire life— have been driven by service to others. I do not question where his loyalties lie.
From what I've seen...Obama is very likely to do something good (for society) with his money, in the long run. How about we stop making noise on this?? It's even less significant than Hillary's emails. Not to mention: he is now a private citizen (and the country's first black president!) Obama has been a dedicated public servant. It's time to allow him to live as he chooses and earn what the market dictates!
Mr. Obama...Mr. Wallstreet. Sad, but true. Carter, Bernie...we need leaders who have the integrity and fortitude to insulate themselves from the fat cats. Once you start eating from their dish...you're gone, girl, gone. 
With all that is going on with Trump and the myriad of horrible things he and his feckless administration have done in only 100days, this criticism of Obama is mind boggling. 
A higher standard?  Obama has not a clue what that means.  
And, just how does the editorial board know that Mr. Obama will not "stay true to his values by giving his speech fees to his foundation and other charities"? Why judge the man before the speech has been given? If the NYT has some inside information about how the Obama's will use the money, it should be reported in the editorial. If not, why start the speculation that Obama has "cashed in"? Why the jump to spoil his reputation without any proof? 
Considering how much money the current president and his family are making, I am finding this article to be racist and bias. While I don't disagree that a post President ethics discussion would be useful - the current presidents total lack of ethics - sharing of taxes- family inplaces of privledge- negotiating of China and other business deals to pad the family oligarchy is the true nightmare.<br/><br/>But no let us continue to blame the first black president.<br/><br/>Check yourself.
Your expectations are charmingly misplaced! After all this time, you still thought he cared about the "little people"?
Obama disappoints this progressive once again.
Who are we to demand that former president Obama, who honored the highest office in the land, especially compared to the current occupant of the white house, to refrain from making money? His big pay day won't affect us, because he will not run for office again. Why do we have to hold him to such a higher standard? Is it because he's the only non-white president? And mind you, I didn't say "black" president, because, no matter how much African-Americans wanted to claim him as one of their own, he wasn't. So, let's not expect him to do what others in the modern era haven't done. He deserves it
How dare a black man earn big bucks! How dare a Democrat!<br/><br/>In context, $400,000 isn't even all that much. Ronald Reagan was paid $2 million for the first speech he made after leaving the presidency, and that was many years ago.<br/><br/>Another example of the double standard.
Your paper's furious energy expended by criticizing  Mrs Clinton and President Obama on this issue contributed to Vlad's coup d'etat. I don't give two ticks about speeches to Wall Street! I do care about its corruption of our economy and the resulting sociological dysfunction. Write about that, please.
If President Obama turns down this speaking opportunity and fee, will poverty in this country be solved? No. Will income inequality simply go away? No. He is under no obligation to live a post presidential life of poverty.  Why is it that no one spoke up about this when white male Republicans were getting rich off of speaking fees? Have you criticized Rudy Guiliani for his post 9/11 speaking tour? It seems this only comes up when it is a woman or a black man. Your racism and misogyny are glaringly obvious right now. 
Why the wringing of hands. Obama's rhetoric has never lived up to his reality. He is the sham he appears to be. Phony. 
What is wrong with being paid a hefty fee for a speech? Clearly to someone Obama's words have great value.<br/>Who is the NYT - or you and I for that matter- to judge what he should do with the money?
"...a man whose historic candidacy was premised on a moral examination of politics"?? Puleeze. Just another money-grubbing hypocrite.
$400,000 is a pittance next to what Trump has already raked in by having us pay for his weekly jaunts to his Dacha. Who cares what they pay a former president, when we have a thief in office now?
"...more than two-thirds of voters, including nearly half of Democrats themselves, said the Democratic Party is out of touch with the concerns of the American people."?  Your editorial board, at least in writing this piece, is out of touch with readers of the New York Times.  <br/><br/>Give Obama a break.  He worked himself to death for 8 years leading this country out of a horrific economic crisis started under George W Bush.  He worked to untangle us from the awful wars of George W Bush.  And he showed us all what it is to be a classy, intellectual leading a divided country.  And now he has to sit back, volunteer in food banks or do pro bono work for the poor?, and watch this buffoon of a president dismantle (or try to) everything he did?  <br/><br/>He will get there.  The country will rue the day they elected a simpleton and turned their backs on Obama's legacy.  
Let's be perfectly clear about this. The only reason Barack Obama is coming under such flack from supposed-friend and foe alike, is because he's a Black man -- and no Black man is supposed to be making that much money.<br/>Not even one as intelligent, experienced, and eloquent as Barack Obama.<br/>Make no mistake about it.<br/>On the other hand, those voices from the other side of the room who cry loudest, make no complaint about the MILLIONS Trump &amp; his Wall Street crew are stashing away on a daily basis, on th Fed's dime.<br/>Start with the price tag of those golfing jaunts to Mar-a-Lago, or the security details for his extended family, or photo-ops disgused as rallies -- Not to mention the earnings from all those secret deals with the Russians.<br/>In light of all this, if Obama can get $400, 000 for a speaking gig, the more power to him.
Years ago when Spike Lee hit the big screen and received a subsequent three-picture deal from Hollywood, a reporter from this newspaper came to Brooklyn to interview the young black filmmaker during a community block party. What was Spike going to do with all that money he was going to make, the reporter asked. And, how was he planning to "give back" to his community? Spike's response to the interviewer was to ask if he ever asked such questions of Eastwood, or Scorcese or any newly-famed white filmmaker. Why was he being held to a different standard? The reporter apologized, the community was delighted.<br/><br/>It is not enough that Barack Obama was the most dignified president this country has had in God knows how long, now certain people want to draw the line on any benefits that he may reap from his experience. Without even knowing what he plans to say, people are "disappointed," "troubled," or downright "upset." Spare us your sanctimony and hypocrisy, please. Direct your energy towards the man currently using the presidency to further enrich himself, his family and friends. You want to draw the line? Draw it around Donald J. Trump.
Obama has every right to charge what the market will bear for his speeches, and indeed anything he does and that others want him to do.  What he does with the money once he gets it is his business, but he is harming no one by taking the money offered.  He also stands in sharp contrast to Trump, who is hardly waiting to leave office to enrich himself even further.  More generally, it is time for Democrats to stop equating success and wealth with moral dissolution.  It is a self-defeating posture that Republicans gloat over and capitalize on.
Leaving aside the morality of getting paid big money to give speeches to big money people, the optics of this are appalling. Obama was a phenomenal president, and the example he set for courage, grace and class in the face of continual attack are non-paralleled. Giving highly paid speeches taints that legacy by making him seem just another politician who feeds at the Wall Street trough. And it comes at a time when Democrats are trying to cast off that image. 
Obama is a Wall Street Democrat, a position he stayed loyal to during 8 years in the White House. The only ones who don't seem to get that are party Democrats.<br/>Getting a big payday is the reward of Capitalism; Obama served Wall Street well, the commoners not-so-much, and we have a Trump presidency as a result.The Donald is not even waiting until he leaves government to rake in the profits.<br/>Ah, the glories of unbridled Capitalism!
Being a Democrat shouldn't be about taking a vow of poverty or being anti capitalist. Our economic strength, standard of living, and influence on the world are largely based on capitalism (and formerly our commitment to rule of law and civil society). <br/><br/>All citizens, but most especially Democrats, should be concerned with how the fruits of capitalism, nurtured by all our citizens, are in turn distributed. Since the time of president Reagan, greed has ruled and income gains have gone principally to the wealthiest among us. That money has in turn been used to further shift the scales in their favor through massive campaign donations, favorable tax laws and regulations, and most recently a stolen seat on the Supreme Court for a man who will undoubtedly be a corporate shill. <br/><br/>While it's righteously decried, money is still the mother's milk of politics. But not all wealthy people or corporations are anti democratic. Under current rules, money and support from powerful interests are necessary to get greater control of government and then in turn fix government. Small dollar donations and grassroots efforts are also important, but so far not enough to counter the massive money and entrenched power on the other side. <br/><br/>Let's win by all means possible, and then get about correcting the ills of our democratic system
This editorial nails it. I don't begrudge the Obamas their extraordinary book deal (thought part of the excess of the current times) but I don't get the Wall Street speech. More of the same? Though I voted for Clinton, it was with no enthusiasm. I really hoped President Obama would leave office and be different. Perhaps he will give the money to a charity or his foundation, but it continues a regrettable trend.
Because the funds can be used for good purposes.<br/>That's why he should do it.
Is this ex-post facto quid pro quo? If I though someone might give me 400k for making a speech, I'd treat them well beforehand. The bankers did much better in the bailout than everyone else; no jail time, no significant clawbacks, bonuses paid as usual... 
There's nothing wrong with getting a piece of the pie.  He earned it.  That chump change he is getting for his speech is the going rate.  Being a good citizen requires that folks do what they can to fulfill their ambitions.  Whatever he does with the money is his business.  Earning $400,000 for a speech doesn't deprive anyone else.  And that's more than you can say for the true 1%ers. 
Former presidents have no sell by date. Jimmy Carter just recently published a successful memoir, in additional to his previous books. <br/><br/>For the lucrative speaking fees, a delay of a couple years might have been wise, for the sake of party strategy. Now there's more of an excuse for the uncooperative Sanders faction to create headaches for the party.
I find this critique infuriating and wrong. President Obama is now a private citizen. He endured an endless series of baseless, sometimes vile, attacks during his presidency. He ran an exemplary administration devoid of the ongoing scandals that characterize the current presidency. Focusing on this issue- a middle-class former chief exec takes a big speaking fee- allows us to ignore the billionaire-led pillaging that's occuring in full view, right now. Just like Steph Curry or Roger Federer, Obama has every right to make some money by leveraging his talents. Cool the sanctimony and hypocrisy.
Former President Obama appears to have to meet a higher standard of behavior than other former Presidents. The first time I heard this type of criticism was when Hillary Clinton accepted funds to speak although many other public figures were paid high fees to speak. This criticism now continues with Obama.<br/>Are Democratic Party members now held to a higher standard? If you believe in fighting injustice and poverty do you have to become impoverished to demonstrate solidarity? What is the value of a speech? All of the noise about wanting to see Transcripts of Hillary Clinton's speeches seems to have disappeared after the illegal release of her emails since most of her speeches appear to be about female equality which was no real surprise. <br/><br/>I wonder what Obama will speak about that is so dastardly? Equal rights perhaps? The value of the individual? What ever it is it will be uplifting and inspirational and worth every penny those wealthy people pay. <br/><br/>You don't need to take a vow of poverty to be an inspirational leader.
The editorial suggests that Obama had a higher standard of integrity than average politicians in the beginning. This assumption may or may not be true. One is inclined to say, "Et tu Brute." His taking the speech money is not only disappointing but is a blow to the raison d'etre of democracy as an institution. Modern politicians when they become leaders have enriched themselves not only in this country but throughout the world. We all wanted Obama to be different and thus it is disheartening that Obama did not turn out to be a Mandela or a Gandhi. 
Aww, I've been saying for the past 7 years that while Obama in office might have turned out to be a dull, compromising, pragmatic centrist rather than the visionary he ran as, my prediction was he would be our greatest EX-president, surpassing even Jimmy Carter. It's sad to see this first indication that my prediction might be wrong.
I work for a large financial services organization and at our yearly summit our executive team hires various world leaders (I've seen past presidents) to speak to our group about leadership.  I've found these speeches illuminating and helped me think about my career in a different context.  Sure, I think it's fair to be skeptical about whether the payments mean anything, but let's not jump to conspiracy.  The summits in my case are attended by well over 1,000 people.  I really do hope my company hires Barack to speak to us someday.  I think it will be worth every penny we pay him.  
SNL had a re-run this past weekend, the show that ran immediately after Trump's inauguration. Two cast members sang "To Sir, With Love," with a portrait of Obama in the background. This was food for thought, particularly with news of Obama profiting from his presidency.<br/><br/>Quite simply, there is no excuse. Jimmy Carter didn't do this. It is all good and well to take money that is offered. We are, after all, a capitalistic nation. But when you do that, you surrender a certain moral ground.<br/><br/>It is long past time to reflect, objectively, on Obama's presidency. He was far better than his predecessor, but he was also far short of what he could have been, and far short of qualifying as a great president. For all the fawning by the NYT and the left, and for all of the finger-pointing at the GOP for being recalcitrant on any number of issues, the fact remains that Obama could not work with Congress in a way that effective presidents--LBJ, Truman and Lincoln, to name a few--must, if they are to record any sort of real accomplishments. Had he been able to do that, we might have Medicare for everyone instead of Obamacare, which does nothing to address the underlying problem, which is the ever-escalating cost of health care. We might have had better gun control. And many other things. Other presidents swayed the opposition.<br/><br/>It is altogether fitting and proper that Obama is getting $400,000 for a speech, because talking, really, was what he did best. Uniting the country? Not so much. 
Wow! Yes, let's hold the one decent President we have had in decades to a higher standard than the current money grubbing one we have at hand. Why assume that he does not need the money for the causes he wishes to tackle?<br/> What better way to get the money to challenge those issues than from Wall Street - the cause of one of the biggest issue his administration had to deal with?<br/>The fact that he spoke to Wall Street is heartening to me. If anyone has always had the interests of lay Americans at heart it was Mr Obama. Let us hope his words mean something to Wall Street that is so very happy to have the current president trying to overturn the regulations Mr Obama's administration put in place to protect us.<br/>Great job trying to deflect the attention from true monstrosity to the one decent person we hope will  soon be standing up for all of us.
I can't think of any group that I want to hear President Obama more than Wall Street bankers. The more they pay him, the more valuable they will think his words are.
I am chiming in with the commenters who are saying that Obama is not doing anything wrong. He isn't taking money away from people who can't afford it. The man is a newly retired president, and he commands top dollar speaking fees. In a way, I feel a little disappointed. But then I think, who am I to judge him and his family? I don't know what their expenses are. I do know that they are putting two children through Ivy League educations. I do know that they are good, moral people. I do know that Mr. Obama has been treated shamefully by the opposition, and he never found it necessary to stoop to their level. He is a class act, through and through. Like I said, part of me is a little disappointed, but the better part of me says he deserves anything he gets without breaking any laws. Needless to say, the current president is a bottom feeder ethically and morally. I don't like the kind of argument that goes back and forth using bad behavior as an excuse for bad behavior. I don't think that argument is even necessary in this case. The man is out of office, and he still gets referenced negatively by the current president. Please, give the man and his wonderful family a break.
That many commentators would claim that the corporations now paying Obama for speaking fees would somehow not expect anything in return is intellectually disingenuous at best. The same goes for the multi-billionaires with whom the Obamas have been vacationing of late.<br/><br/>While it is true that Obama will not seek public office again, he does now have and continue to retain formidable influence in DC politics and at a local level. It doesn't take much of a stretch of the imagination to expect that these business interests and new-found friends will be seeking introductions and access to Obama's political connections.<br/><br/>For those commenting here to ignore that fact is intellectual dishonesty.
I find it fascinating that individuals who found Obama to be more than capable in his decision making when president now find his reasoning skills as a civilian lacking.  Barack and Michelle are not running for office in the future, and neither has demostrated an ability to spin gold out of straw.  They have to earn to eat, and that is exactly what they are doing.  Instead of focusing on what he is doing in his personal life, time would be better spent focusing on what the Democratic Party is doing to strengthen their weak spots.  I don't consider Obama the leader of the Democratic Party anymore, just a member in high standing.  
Suddenly, the press opposes capitalism?  I agree.  We have adopted a form of oligarchy -- a totalitarian capitalism -- that too often overlooks public opinion.<br/><br/>But if Kevin Durant is worth $25 million to the Warriors, then the Obamas are worth what the market will bear.<br/><br/>Besides, right about now, people will pay a lot for a reminder of what the presidency used to be.  
He isn't in politics any more. If he doesn't give away any national secrets and just flaps his mouth for an hour, maybe even just reciting the Rime of the Ancient Mariner after his latest sea adventures, just  so they can eyeball him up close and personal for the knockdown fee of £400k, more power to his arm. A bargain at the price.<br/><br/>Getting a normal job with actually mentally and ethically fulfilling work and real authority along with a fair salary after being president and the most powerful man in the world has got to be hard, and his speechifying fee will get lower the longer he is out of office.<br/>Unlike Trump, he is looking to establish his long term financial basis of security  after he left office not while in it.<br/><br/>The truth is, that in much of the western world and beyond, if the laws allowed it, he could stand for the highest position in any of numerous lands and win with a landslide, because despite his flaws of which so many Americans assume plenty, he is the most respected politician in the world, and we would happily if temporarily  give up on the rules of citizenship for our leaders and grab the greatest prize of all, Obama as our national leader. Believe me, the ways things are right now, we the masses would wage wars just to claim him as our rightful loot to crown as leader.<br/><br/>You had no idea of the value of what you had while he was your president.
I have been a fan of Barack Obama since the beginning of his presidency. I voted   for him in 2008 and 20012.  I am disappointed in his taking this $400,000 fee from Wall Street. Perhaps he will donate the entire sum to his foundation. I ask him to consider this option.
The Clintons were also payed a lot of money for giving talks at the big financial institutions.  It was used against Hillary in the campaign, detractors saying she was in the pockets of big money but we also know that a lot of good was done with much of that money.  The Clinton's never backed away from the "good fight" through successes and failures.   I expect the Obamas will not be different.
Yes, the optics are bad but there is a HUGE distinction to be made between a former public servant and a current public servant or prospective one.  Nor do we know whether or not he's going to donate the entire amount to charity, which would not surprise me at all (particularly given the size of the nest egg he's going to get from the book deal, which the NYT doesn't criticize).<br/>Anyway, this is quite different from HRC's speaking practices as a prospective candidate, or 45's abuse of the public fisc.  
It's a speech...what's important is the content, not the price tag.  Don't tell me how much President Obama is getting...show me what he says.  I humbly consider myself a left-wing liberal and progressive who was raised, and continues to passionately believe in socialist ideals - for me, one's integrity and moral character are a person's most precious assets.  And, yet...if anyone offered ME a lot of money to give a speech, frankly, I'd TAKE IT!  (And, if that speech were before a big corporation or Wall Street firm, I'd be happy to speak truth to power).  Besides, shouldn't we wait to see what he does with the money?  Maybe he'll donate it to a local homeless shelter...a perfect way to redistribute wealth! 
Cut the guy a break. Eight years in the White House preceded by his time as a US Senator ought to earn him the chance to make some outside income. I'd prefer that he concentrate on finishing a book or three, however.
Your article about the NY city subway addresses a real problem. This piece is unconstructive conservative complaining, it addresses nothing, for nobody.<br/><br/>Let's save our criticism for the current administration. You know, the folks actually in power who are currently taking our tax dollars and giving us zilch in return. 
Oh for heavens Sake !! Now we are attacking Mr. Obama post presidency.<br/><br/>When will we leave the man alone to do as he pleases now that he is finally free of the right wing obstructionists?  <br/><br/>You might try speculating what he plans to do with the fees.  Overturn Citizens United perhaps?  Personally fund Planned Parenthood so it can continue its good work?  <br/><br/>Go for it, Mr. Obama more power to you.  
It is funny that people laud Trump for making money. Even knowing how he makes it (schemes, deals, Trump-U), that he has gone into bankruptcy, rendering havoc on others, etc. The cheer his wealth. Even find it fun that he takes money from the "suckers" out there. And they don't care that he makes more on top of more and that his charities are, well, self-serving. <br/><br/>Obama comes along. Get's a piece of the pie and It's "disappointing", "he should give it to charity", "it calls into question his integrity". Which would be understandable from the Bernie democrats and but from those who also support Trump?<br/><br/>Double standard from the Trump cheering squad. 
One negative note I cannot escape is that the Democratic Party's existence was more in Obama's - and the Clinton's - hands than they seemed to exhibit. And ultimately I find it hard not to blame the Trump Presidency squarely on their shoulders. They could have and should have operated in ways that avoided this state we are now in.<br/><br/>Thus, I do not feel that Obama should feel great about accepting large sums of money for having been our president for the last 2 terms.<br/><br/>Do I wish he could have run for a 3rd term? Absolutely. Do I think he was the most presidential of presidents perhaps since Jimmy Carter? Absolutely. There was hope, and he fought against a tyranny of obstruction in people like Mitch McConnell and the rest.<br/><br/>But he dropped the baton. He should pause to pick it up. Perhaps he will be giving lots of that money to those in real need.<br/><br/>That would be good, but we need to hear about it.<br/><br/>2020 has great potential for the Planet and our country. And talk about slogans "2020 Foresight" and more. MMXX.<br/><br/>Please help us Obama. We need you now more than ever. Don't just get rich from your days in office.
People become the people they surround themselves with.  Obama has spent the past 100 days with billionaires and A+ list celebrities.  It's good for his foundation, sure, but it also say something about who he is.   
Commenters saying Trump is worse miss the point. The comparison not between Obama and the current vulgarian in the WH. It's between a man's deeds and his proclaimed principles. <br/><br/>And not just any man. A Democratic ex-president who, whether he now just wants to skydive and golf, is still the tallest man in the party. The one, now that Hillary is dead and buried, Americans see as the exemplar of Democratic values.
Every time I heard about the whereabouts or doings of the Obamas, I am reminded of that famous Dr. Seuss book, "Marvin K. Mooney, Will You Please Go Now?"<br/>You've done enough damage. Just go.
I don't care if someone paid him a lot of money to speak. They are not buying influence. And I didn't care if Hillary Clinton got paid a lot of money to speak. This is a non-issue.
Well with this, we know Michelle isn't going to be running for President. 
President Obama will never run for office again, so there is no equivalency to Hillary Clinton. Do you know that he pocketed this money for himself and family, or did he use it to invest in his foundation? It seems to me the Editorial Board has lost its priorities here. <br/><br/>We have a President who has brought family members and wealthy patrons to serve in his administration. We have a President who is, week-in-and-week-out, enriching his business by traveling to his own property, where he has now increased its membership fees. We have a President who invites his daughter to sit next to Xi of China and voila...new Chinese Trademarks for the daughter. Come on ladies and gentleman of the Editorial Board, keep your head in the game as to what is vitally important. This issue is so far down the list of priorities of Americans that you make yourselves look quite silly.
It don't look good. Money from Wall Street sunk Hillary Clinton. In today's Times we have a story about Joe Biden and how the Dems need to address their working class former base. Obama taking in $400,000 from Wall Street don't help. And where's does his greed stop? Obama and his wife are pulling in 65 million in book deals. The family is worth several hundred million. Pittance in Trumpian terms but still in 1% range. Obama talks well but producing good results is often beyond his ken .
I am blown away to learn this information as I am blown away to read all these comments from readers who accept this ill-advised habit. How can Obama still be an undisputable voice if he accepts money from people with very specific interest? To remain above the fray, his only option is to give this money to charities. I was expecting Obama to be different. I was hoping he would set new standard. I am very disappointed. This is a question of principles and values. If they are not respected, everything goes away.
I liked President Obama and I am not likely to forget the financial chaos that he inherited when he was elected president. He led a good and thoughtful turnaround of the economy and I gave him a solid B for his eight-year performance.<br/><br/>But "tone deaf" are the two words that say it best.  This applies to readers jumping to Obama's defense; you must have skipped over the part about 65 million dollar book deal. Like Bill and Hillary Clinton, the Obamas are from modest means but now on the road to establishing a family legacy of wealth. (The Clinton's net worth estimated at 50-60 million). And both families are now heavily subsidized by nice government pensions, free health care, travel and security details. I suspect the Obama's have an even higher potential to amass family wealth.<br/><br/>There is an old adage that sits in the back of our collective consciousness that drives this conversation about paid speeches; He who pays the piper calls the tune.  <br/><br/>To be fair to the Obamas, that is more of a cautionary instructive for politicians who are running for office and might be painted as listening to (bribed by) their corporate donors. But after our national conversation about Hillary's speeches, Obama must just not care about how this news would play out.  And that lack of caring is what his supporters find hurtful... and what his detractors will find helpful...
Though President Obama delivered all sorts of liberal religious symbolism during his two terms, such as national monuments, he was essentially a President of big business. His cabinet had a well oiled pipeline to Wall Street. He made few waves to both those who gutted the U.S. economy, and most importantly, his Justice Department's Anti Trust Division stood mute while a toxic consolidation took place in key industries. He is simply going to speak to his friends. Leave him alone.
The corruption of special interest money in politics has given us a government beholden to the wealthy, lowered their tax rates, done away with regulations on banks and big business, etc., while a partisan SCOTUS did away with limits on campaign donations, voter protections, etc., all of which directly and deliberately led to an enormous income inequality; which the current administration is working rapidly to increase and make more intractable, while doing away with many of the remaining protections and opportunities that benefit the rest of us.<br/><br/>This is the reality that the majority of American voters allowed to happen over the course of the last 35 years, and will require enormous effort and resources to reverse. Obama tried to do what he could, but the Republicans, and those who voted for them, greatly limited what he could accomplish.<br/><br/>In light of the above, unlike those in office who abuse their positions of power and trust, Obama should not be criticized for whatever he is able to earn from speeches and book contracts, etc., especially if it will better allow him to devote his time and energies to continue the fight he began as president.
C'mon.<br/><br/>I wouldn't have expected any less.  He's a former president and people want to know what he has to say.<br/><br/>I do find it slightly odd that after his term in office ended he went and spent vaca time in ritzy places on the dime of very wealthy Americans who he'd gotten to know during his time as president.<br/><br/>Me?  I would have wanted some simple piece and quiet.  But maybe this is part of the plan.  To continue to mine the money of his upper end donors to try and achieve his post presidential aims, whatever they are.
President Obama's acceptance of $400,000 for a speech with Wall Street is exactly what is wrong with the Democratic Party, and I say that having worked in his 2008 Campaign. Shame on you, Mr. President.<br/><br/>As long as the Democrats continue to be the Republican Party with a softer edge, we can expect the Trumps and Ryans to stay in power indefinitely.
I disagree with this editorial.  I don't see any reason Obama should not talk to these folks and take their money.  I do think it would be a good idea for him to make the contents of these speeches public, on the premise that anything he says that is remotely interesting will wind up in the public domain anyway.
Jimmy Carter is probably the best example for an ex-president. Unfortunately he is a better ex-president than he was as president. Anyway it is very difficult after leading the free world and having access to power and influence to leave it all behind. It might be easier if the US increased the allowance for ex-presidents to several million per year in exchange for a set speaking fee. But it might not do any good since it takes an extraordinarily self confident person to give up money and power. I am not sure that I could do the same in a similar situation.
I don't agree that his speaking fee at a Wall St function is unseemly. Perhaps by speaking at a Wall St conference for a large fee he can then speak to less monied groups and schools for far less - or gratis. Obama could have gone from Harvard to any law firm in the country but chose a life of public service. I am grateful he chose that path and think criticism of this type is unmerited.
I don't begrudge Pres. Obama's fee, and I have no doubt that he and Mrs. Obama will both make significant monetary contributions to charitable organizations. However, it would be inspiring to see a man of Obama's stature make a point of accepting fees to redirect to nonprofit organizations, his presidential library or foundation, or another worthy cause. And it's possible that is his unstated plan, and he does not need to crow about it. As we are met daily in the news by greed personified, it would be a refreshing reminder of sincere philanthropy.  
Folks, it's what he does not what he says that matters. He now vacations with billionaires, accepts speaking fees and negotiates a whopping advance on his book. I'm still waiting for his pledge to redistribute his new wealth to those he purports to serve.<br/>The $65M advance for he and Michelle make me wonder...how many books must be sold in order for the publisher to even earn back the advance? The publisher must bear production costs, marketing costs, distribution costs and then there's the retailer's profit. Makes me wonder how this works. Is this just another "fee"? What are the economics with respect to his previous books?
Yeah, well, it is important to remember that the only times his attention was on the 99% was in the 6-12 months prior to the elections.  Once he won the election the 99% got ignored for the next 3 years until they were needed again to secure a win for him.   It's no surprise that his post-presidency is predominately hob-nobbing with the rich and famous.   Despite what he wrote in his book (also timed to help his campaign), he's never been an empathetic human being.   It's always been all about HIM, HIS campaign, HIS legacy.
Betrayal of sentiment? More like stuff and nonsense. The former President has nothing to answer for, and no one to answer to for his private dealings on behalf of the current and future well being of his family. <br/><br/>He is no longer walking the Oval Office tightrope over politicians braying for him to do their bidding or fall to his ruin. <br/><br/>He did what had been considered impossible as recently as the beginning of 2008. The man's image deserves to be carved on Mount Rushmore.<br/><br/>Never mind the cost.
It is not fair to compare President Obama's speaking fees and Hillary Clinton's.  She was running for president and would have to reward her donors in some way.  Barak and most likely Michelle are done with political office.  If he wasn't who we thought he was, then too bad.  It was a hard job with an even harder climb.  I am not too upset by his speeches to Wall Street.  He knows better than most that money talks.  In his new world being a millionaire is prerequisite for a place at the table.  Although, I will be offended if he starts telling others to hold a higher standard but until then let him feed at the trough like the others.  It is the way of the world right now.  He has 2 children to raise and will want the best for them. Best of luck, Barak.  We still have Elizabeth and Bernie.  
I understand that he'll be sharing that amount with non-profit organizations. But if not, what's the problem? He more than deserves it. What we really should be worried about is what Trump is trying to do with the American people's money!
This is not the first time president Obama has chased money.<br/>In 2008 John McCain, Republican candidate, had proposed<br/>to limit presidential campaign to public funding.Obama<br/>rejected the proposal and perpetuated fund raising from<br/>wealthy donors with bad consequences for democracy.<br/>In fact it has been transformed into plutocracy. He plans to<br/>continue to hobnob with the wealthy 1% and speak<br/>soothing words for 99% in public.
The commentators saying "let Obama earn a few bucks as a private citizen" are deeply out of touch.<br/>His salary as president of $400,000 is exorbitant in comparison to the average wage of an American worker. This is not to mention the millions he and his wife are earning from their books. This is pure greed.<br/>The idea that Obama being paid simply for his wisdom is absurd. No speech is worth $400,000.<br/>Its quite clear he is being for his contacts and influence. Obama knows many people in government and can make introductions and pull influence. Let's not be naive here.<br/>I was an avid Obama supporter, but am now bitterly disillusioned. He spoke of changing politics. He did no such thing. He's just another social climber who idolizes the wealthy class and wants to assuage his sense of inferiority by being accepted into it. So sad!
I think it would be great if Obama actually went back to academia where he could give back all the knowledge he has acquired and work to spread his political philosophy. Speaking deals, however, are just personal enrichment.
Let's give Presidents a lifetime income and forbid them from making private money at all -- if that's what we want to do. 
I believe that money is the root of all evil in society and especially so in politics. Like the Times editorial board, I'd like to see Obama present some rejection to money's influence. Of course I'm trying to hold him to some higher standard but he was our President. He was held to it then and, like it or not, has a continued responsibility to the country. The man isn't poor. In fact, he's quite wealthy and can afford a wealthy life style. So any excess can be spent to support his/our ideals. Donating these high speaking fees to worthy groups would be a terrific gesture that won't really affect his own bottom line. I'd like to see him do it. <br/><br/>Don't anyone misunderstand... I will not think less of Obama for keeping the fees in his own pocket. But I'll think more of him for sharing them. 
And what if Obama gave the speech for very little money or no money?  Would he not be criticized for giving "favors" to the rich by not charging them?  This is ridiculous, especially in the face of the blatant, unethical, and morally repugnant self-enrichment of the entire Trump clan.  <br/><br/>So it's only okay if horrible humans make money?  Good people are not allowed?  A man with Obama's achievement does not merit the highest speaking fees from wealthy corporations?  Please.
The bankers, company CEO's, sport stars, etc. get 10's to 100's of millions for their supposed talent.<br/><br/>I see nothing wrong with a guy that ran a competent Presidency making millions of dollars after leaving his job.
The editorial and news article leave some important questions unanswered.<br/><br/>What are appropriate speakers fees for former public office holders?  GW Bush earned $100k.  Is that too much or not enough?<br/><br/>What should be the going rate?  Should they do these speeches for free?  Should we pass a law imposing a period of time after election in which they may not charge any fee?  If we are to restrict their ability to earn money, do we need to increase their salary or deferred compensation?<br/><br/>Optics are one matter but we are expect newspapers to do more than just report on the optics.  Provide information on what is usual and what is unusual.  Then tell us if the unusual causes ethical or legal concerns.
I do not think there is anything wrong with President Obama accepting a large sum for his paid remarks. Here is a man, possibly one of our greatest presidents,  giving his thoughts to an audience of the wealthiest people in the world. This is a true star in every sense of the word. The $400K is wholly an appropriate amount if not gross underpayment. <br/><br/>It is disingenuous to suggest, as this editorial does, that there is something immoral about his acceptance of the payment. Unlike some past presidents -GWB and Reagan - who had very little intellectual depth and therefore one could argue that any amount ( even $1) should be considered cashing in, Presidents like Obama, Clinton, Bush Sr. etc are intellectual stars and they should receive outsize payments for their thoughts.  <br/><br/>Perhaps the NYT editorial board should publicize the size of speaking fees paid to other "distinguished" speakers. If someone like Michael Flynn can get $40,000 to show up at a RT dinner, it seems to me the Mr. Obama is being grossly underpaid.
I just love it when the hypocrisy of the left is exposed for the nation to see. Even Bernie is starting to enjoy the prosperity of being a national celebrity
If Obama gets huge fees for speaking that will lead a great many Trump supporters to support reforms which will reduce the ability of future Presidents to capitalize on the office.
I don't care how much Mr and Mrs Obama's wealthy friends pay them for a few words and a little of their time. Let them enjoy relaxing on yachts, secluded islands, private jets, and the estates of the filthy rich.<br/>It must be difficult not being the most important people in the world, the centerpiece of each day's media coverage. If they are able to monetize their egos, more power to them. They'll never have to break a sweat as long as they live.
It would be interesting to know what he actually said. Hillarys failure to reveal the same certainly contributed to her downfall. <br/><br/>I would think that speaking to the wealthy and powerful is sensible, but if you are not wealthy and powerful, I would want to hear that I was included in the calculations of well being for the future. 
The American people suffered terribly from a Great Recession that was caused in large part by the criminal greed of Wall Street investment banks.  Yet President Obama did not prosecute a single one of those banks or their officers.  And no one should be surprised by this.  After all, these same banks helped bankroll Obama's two presidential campaigns.  Now that he's out of office, Obama is turning once again to Wall Street for financial support.  <br/><br/>As your editorial notes, this cozy relationship with Wall Street is all too common with modern presidents.  Barack Obama deserves no less criticism for this than his predecessors.  But instead of asking Obama to personally eschew such filthy lucre, the Times should have used the space to advocate more fundamental  change in the form of sweeping campaign finance laws. Presidential campaigns should be funded by the voting public, not by large banks, corporations, and other wealthy special interests.  That's how it's done in other industrialized nations and how it used to be done here.  Though such reform is highly unlikely in the current political climate, grassroots groups like Move to Amend and Public Citizen are pushing for it and the Times should give them its support.
Politicians' default rationale for their obscene levels of incessant fundraising, speechifying and book-producing is the high cost of campaigning. Well, in the case of Mr. Obama, what's he running for?<br/><br/>Once aboard the gravy train, it becomes addictive, intensified by a sense of entitlement, and it's amazing how easily idealism devolves into greed. And as of this writing, there's no known cure.
As a member of the 99%, I for one do not resent the 1%.
The ends do not justify the means.  Why people feel that if he gives the money to his foundation, it is OK.  Why?  <br/><br/>Let's not forget Obama raised more money from Wall Street for his campaigns than any other candidate to date. His Justice Department refused to prosecute any financial institution that reeked absolute misery on millions of families and on seniors whose retirement funds collapsed leaving many destitute. This lack of accountability sent a signal to financial institutions that the Obama administration considered Wall Street above the law.  ((Think Wells Fargo)<br/><br/>And with all his exhortations about the importance of a college education<br/>he federalized the student loan system whereby the federal government profits immensely from student loan interest and defaults and now sits atop the most predatory lending system in our nation's history to the tune of $1 trillion.  <br/><br/>Obama facing the most crushing economic crisis brought on by a decade of orgiastic deregulation and unchecked greed, had a clear mandate to rein in Wall Street and remake the entire structure of the American economy but instead he installed the very individuals who helped create the crisis, expanding and shoring up the broken system.<br/><br/>All his folksy rhetoric does nothing to mitigate the cruel infliction of the massive harm he inflicted upon the very citizens who put him into office.  His accepting $400k only sullies him and his alleged principles.  Action speak louder than words.  It was wrong.
Well, maybe it's because he's just like everyone else.  That ten million dollar book deal just isn't enough to ensure the security of his great-great-grandchildren.<br/><br/>Yeah, I voted for him twice-yes-twice, got Republican Light, and this ain't no surprise.
Let's save our opinions on this for a later date. Last night Joe Biden announced up here in NH , that he and the President would be available , as of last night, to candidate whenever called upon to do so, Exciting new and probably will raise much more money that Obama will ever pocket. I am so happy he's back and my heart is uplifted and hope is stirring. YES WE CAN!!!
Wall street is not the enemy. Obama's presidency was historical for many good reasons. The reason why Hilary lost the election is not because of he Goldman Sach speeches but because the far left acted as if she had slept with the devil himself and the right exploited that as hypocrisy as if only republicans deserve to earn obscene amounts of money. 
Mr. Obama and his family have made enormous personal sacrifices to serve in their high-profile, public-service roles.  It's time for us to leave him alone and let him take care of himself and his family.<br/><br/>For goodness sake!  Top basketball salaries are around $30 million. Get a grip.  We were lucky to have had Obama for as long as we did.  Let go. 
I think we really need to get real, people. This guy is a millionaire, former two-term president, and very much the only remaining link to the sane past. Of COURSE he is going to charge a lot to give a speech. And why not? People are willing to pay, right? Somehow, the Left seems to be stuck in the Good Old Days - only they're all old and they can't tell which ones were good.<br/><br/>Let Mr. Obama earn what he can. It is time for the Democratic Party to take stock and understand several things: he cannot be re-elected and the Clinton Machine is not what this country needs; they are just like the Trump Family only with better language skills.<br/><br/>Move on, Left. Move on.
Maybe he's not doing it for his own benefit. Maybe the $60 million book deal will pay his bills for the foreseeable future. But the optics are bad, at a time when the Democrats need all the credibility they can get. So Mr. Ex-President, if you have a plan to make this speech an act of goodness, please clue us in. 'Cause were all dying here!
I wish I could agree with the premise of this editorial as it makes an important argument. But, and it's a big adverb here, Barack Obama served this nation for eight long years while navigating through a terrible recession and an end to a war that was never authorized. He's human and so is the desire to leave some estate to his children.<br/><br/>This is his (well-earned) time now and he was not a wealthy man before assuming office. And, perhaps through his speeches in the here and now, paid or not, he can make a difference as Donald Trump continues his inexorable march toward the destruction of our democratic institutions.<br/><br/>Sure, in a perfect world, he'd not take the money, or take less, but this man has paid his dues to this nation beyond what we could reasonably expect. To reap the benefits of it now, in an above-board  manner, is not something I feel ok about judging - even as the NYT does.
Pres. John Kennedy said:<br/><br/>"Let us never NEGOTIATE out of fear, but let us never fear to NEGOTIATE."<br/>========================================================<br/><br/>I hope that Pres. Obama will focus on improving negotiations at all levels. Now, with lying Donald Trump, negotiations are breaking down on many levels. In government, we have polarization and threats. <br/><br/>But I think Pres. Obama is partly to blame for the break down. He talked down to people. He distanced himself, with the tele-prompter. He was often "no-drama" Obama. He distanced himself from social media. People became bored with his aloofness.<br/><br/>Yes, perhaps he can use the zillions of dollars he can earn, to further real dialogue. As JFK said: "Let us begin..."
The "Foundation" Obama setup, like all "Foundations" setup by America's wealthy, is a nonprofit organization designed to avoid paying federal, state and local taxes.
Obama gets 400k. Trump (as president) is presently enriching his brand and family through illegal means and bad ethics to the tune of hundreds of millions
Apparently the Obamas have every right to make such money, but morally and spiritually I admire the decision Jimmy Carter made foregoing the big money. My only reluctance for voting for Hillary was her cozy relationship  with wall street and the immense payments she accrued.
I wouldn't ask President Obama to do anything I wouldn't do, and I don't give time or money to those who would squander it.
I am surprised and saddened to see Mr. Obama do this.  Perhaps there is some justification, but it looks lousy.  Jimmy Carter continues to stand out as the US President of the last 50 years who had, and has, integrity.  
Is this the mountain that the left is willing to die on? Whether a world renowned private citizen should be paid for speeches? Good luck in 2018, guys. 
Wait a minute, am I missing something? This is a man who spent his presidency trying to be the moral light to a country that could care less.<br/>For crying out loud, his presidency was defined by laws and policies that essentially kept Wall Street in check!! <br/><br/>Does anyone have any idea what tone his speech is take? What if he is going in there to tell them to suck it up and act more responsibly.<br/>Do we know what Mr. Obama will even do with the money - charity, party donations...?<br/>Please leave the man alone. He deserves much more than that. Heck, if a large military contractor is offering him $4M for a speech, he should take it. <br/><br/>If the right goes low, the left should go lower!!
Why shouldn't Obama make money on a speech to Wall Street? He is still a capitalist, is he not? If he were white, would this even be raised as an issue? 
Why should he set a standard higher than his predecessors and his wannabe successor? He never was what he purported to be, nor what the American people hoped he would be. He was just an ordinary POTUS and is just an ordinary person, albeit with academic credentials. 
I don't care if President Obama gets paid big bucks for giving speeches to Wall Street.  If he can share ideas with them that help even one of them grow a conscience, more power to him.  And why in the world would he speak for free to Wall Street?  So, there's that.  You think the Dems lost the 2016 election because of Hillary's paid speeches?  Really?  You know that Trump's constituency doesn't care about his tax returns--they voted for him anyway.  You know he was caught lying over and over and over, and they voted for him anyway.  You know he's a shameless bigot, right. The only thing Trump was in touch with was the profound ignorance cultivated by years of watching Fox and reality tv shows.  That and he validated their bigotry. Stop trying to make noble beasts of these people.  There is nothing noble about the people who voted for Donald Trump.  Obama can get paid for speeched every single day and he'll still have more nobility that Trump or his band of deplorables can hope for--even with audacity.
I don't begrudge him making money but the question is how much is enough?  He's already very wealthy and never has to worry about the things most of us do.<br/>The Clintons used the excuse that they were left with massive legal bills from Bill's time as president but the Obamas have no such excuse and even with that I bet Hillary is sorry she ever heard of Goldman Sachs.
Welcome to America...It's ok to make money. Really it is. 
Wouldn't it be appropriate to learn the nature of Mr. Obama's remarks before condemning them?
Don't worry, Barak, Lincoln was skewered also for taking money for his Cooper Union Address.  
I say, "Talk away, Mr. Obama, and charge what the market will bear."
While in office, President Obama spent a lot of time on the Upper East Side of NYC, at the homes of Greek shipping magnates, who are on Fifth Avenue, and others of similar massive wealth, brought from their countries to hide it here in the US, in various ways.   <br/><br/>In office.  Then he would leave their catered parties (saw this first hand, so it's not second hand info) and be escorted by the NYPD (on NY tax payers' nickel) to see a Broadway show, in a huge motorcade that shut down swaths of the city.  <br/><br/>He is not above the fray, and we have no proof that he "wrestled with what it means to be a representative public servant in an era of purchased influence".  <br/><br/>Either the NYTimes is "naive" or they think the public is stupid. <br/><br/>Words are cheap. 
can he just give me a million bucks? He wouldn't miss it. And I am a good person I will spend it on old people and animals (my mom and ;y cat..) I think that is why we all forgive them - we are hoping they will just shed some flakes on us.
Let's worry about kleptocracy, not meritocracy.
The titular head of the Democratic Party accepts a huge cash payment from Wall Street.<br/><br/>Our last election proved that perception can become reality.<br/>This doesn't look good and millions of people who voted for Barack Obama twice and voted for Donald Trump last year are saying "I told you so"<br/><br/>That is all.....
This is what you're worried about? This, when Trump is going to welcome Duterte to the WH because, never mind the blood shed, our president has business interests in that country he wants to protect? And who congratulates Erdogan, who does business with a corrupt Azerbaijan family with ties to the Iran Revolutionary Guard, who is profiting directly from the Chinese government as I write this (I could go on). That is what deserves relentless questioning and full- throated condemnation. Please!
Thank you for helping me sort this. I was bewildered and disappointed to read of Obama's speech fee. It was said he left office worth 12 million which I know is peanuts-to-the-rich...??? Does anyone truly need more than 12 million dollars to live comfortably?<br/> And, Obama is giving Trump the same courtesy Bush gave him by not criticizing Trump's regime. Is it courtesy or is it I'm-sick-of-this-and-don't-want-to-get-involved? We need the voices of our respected citizens to speak out....Obama, can you really say ...yes, I was your hope for 8 years and now you deal with this?<br/>The Times has nailed this. Obama, you're still living your legacy and, so far, it's decadently disappointing.
But it was okay for the candidate YOU endorsed, Hillary Clinton, to accept outrageous "speaking fees" from the same bunch of Wall Street bandits you chastise Mr. Obama for addressing?<br/>Trump didn't release his tax returns and Clinton wouldn't reveal the speeches she made. We see the results every day and your attack on "private citizen" Obama is, well, useless. He's not president, Clinton's not president and a creature that "tweets" IS president. Those of us in the "trenches" call this "reality", unpalatable, despicable "reality".<br/>Next column, try to tell us how to influence those millions who didn't vote in the last election to get off their duffs and try to effect some kind of change. Otherwise, spare me the "Obama" columns if you would?
Oh for crying out loud, if a Wall Street firm is dumb enough to hand Obama 400 grand for a boilerplate speech, Obama would be insane not to accept the loot.<br/><br/>Here's a hint --- it's called fleecing the rubes. And if those Wall Streets fools and their money are soon parted, I say GOOD!
The verbal gymnastics displayed in the comments section here in the Times is the best satire I have read in a long time. Obama has every right to cash in; but don't rationalize his "Clinton Like" going for the money as anything other than an elitist exploiting his position in life. His diatribes that so eloquently hypnotize the faithful to think that he is a savior. When in the end he is in it for the money first and guiding principals are just a mirage for the unwashed masses. 
Legend has  it that Pres. Harry Truman once refused an offer to become a boad member of a U.S. corporation with the statement, "You don't want me, you want the Office of the President of the United States.  And that's not for sale."  Presidents including Ronald Reagan, Bill Clinton and now Barack Obama have given the lie to Mr. Truman's claim, by selling half-baked speeches to anybody in the world with enough money to buy their presence.
I think there needs desperately to be a reform bill about Presidents (and Presidential candidates) -- Trump has done us a favor, really, by forcing this issue to the fore.<br/><br/>If you want Presidential candidates to be legally obligated to reveal their past tax returns...OK, but make it a LAW applicable to ALL. And then restrict Presidents (and perhaps other high office holders) from this speech-making and gaming of the system to make vast sums of money. The Clinton's abused this especially egregiously, but honestly, they all do it.<br/><br/>A former President gets a very nice pension, and lifetime Secret Service protection -- THAT'S ENOUGH. Make the law so no former POTUS may profit with book deals or speeches -- they can write books and speak, but the monies MUST go directly to charities that are NOT AFFILIATED in any way with their names, or relatives (no more Clinton Family Foundation!).<br/><br/>Just the appearance of corruption in this matter -- former POTUSES licking their chops for the juicy deals and wealth coming their way after serving! -- has tarnished the office, and frankly: it attracts the wrong kind of people into politics.
Everyone needs to survive in a world full of materialism. The reality is that the Supper is always warm &amp; tasty in the Rich man's abode.<br/>There is no harm in the Ex President dining &amp; giving Speeches at Wall Street Club.I hope it's humourous speeches.<br/>Every Singer,Comedian,Chef,Journalist......would like to entertain and partake the delicious offerings in Cash and kind offered by the Rich &amp; Famous.<br/>This is the ethos of the world.He who has the Cash makes the rules .
Bah. Even before Obama was elected he was criticized for leaning towards being part of the good-old-boy club. Look, he plays golf. But it is sort of surprising, from a public image perspective.
Give this man a break! Why is Barack Obama always held to a different standard? This former president served us well for 8 years. It was  actually Barack Obama who helped make this country great again following the catastrophic Boy-Bush years of lies, wars and near economic oblivion. I hope he makes a fortune in his new life. He will probably donate much of what he earns making speeches.... to decent causes, including his own foundation. God-Speed Mr.Ex-President.
The problem with an editorial like this is the false equivalence it sets up with truly reprehensible behavior.<br/><br/>Obama, a private citizen, after decades of public service where every single thing he or anyone in his family did was subject to absolutely relentless scrutiny, who has enabled full transparency by sharing tax returns and cooperating with whatever absurd vetting he was put through -- makes ONE SPEECH where he gets some cash from people who can well afford to pay him. oh, the outrage! How DARE he. <br/><br/>Meanwhile, our current president is attempting while in office to pass a tax code that will, for many years to come, impact over 300 million people  -- many economists think negatively, except the top -- that will also directly benefit himself and his family. While failing to comply with any vetting or requests for his own financial information.<br/><br/>These are not equivalent situations. But by harping on the former, the NYTimes draws attention from the latter, which is where we should all be focused.<br/><br/>Finally--here we go again, liberals stamping their feet and wailing because someone does something slightly less than perfect after DECADES of being nothing but. Eye roll. Signed, a disgusted liberal.
It is too bad that you chose this theme to write on today, because you have no idea what Barack Obama is going to do or how he is going to spend his money. I am sure that he and Michele have their favorite charities. However the tiny little hidden point you make about the Democratic party? Why not expand on a to do list for that bunch instead of criticizing the ex-president, whom is now a private citizen entitled to do whatever he wants? The democratic party on the other hand will not be handed the opportunity that he presented again in the near future unless they get organized, commit and find a candidate that actually understands how government works and for whom it works. Let's move forward and leave the Obamas alone for a minute, rather than insisting that they uphold some kind of standard that you set for them. Because for all we know they talked about education and the arts and school lunches the way they always have and personal relationships build strong alliances. Get together with your friends over dinner and talk about how you can make a difference in society, include a few people that you don't have perfect rapport with too and listen to them. Because I have a sneaking suspicion that this may be a topic now and again with the Obamas and their friends and dinner companions. 
Only one virtue in America. Be rich.
Here's the question: do you suppose Obama will come contribute to charitable causes, like Jimmy Carter?  Or do you suppose he will purchase lobbyists/politicians, as republican billionaires do?
et tu Obama?<br/><br/>Yep.  The male impersonation of Hillary Clinton and the personification of a professional politician.  <br/><br/>How disappointing.<br/><br/>Not illegal.  Just really disappointing.
Perhaps by an oversight, Barack Obama made the unfortunate<br/>mistake of not establishing a foundation or project before raising funds.
"The Democratic Party badly needs such an example to follow. As the presidential election clarified so painfully, the traditional party of working people has lost touch with them."<br/><br/>Wrong! This buys into the fake dichotomy that the Republi-Cants have used to shape our political discourse and dupe broad swaths of Americans.<br/><br/>Their strategy: Reframe politics as being mostly about social issues, rather than economic and diplomacy issues. Use that to drive a wedge between conservatives and liberals. Demonize anyone who disagrees with you as "dangerous to society." Demonize them as "not like us."<br/><br/>The Dems haven't lost ground because their approaches to the economy and diplomacy are bad. They've lost because the Right has linked Democrats with being the party that supports poor people, racial minorities, immigrants, GLBTs, and non-gun owners. They've built a false construct that the "real" Americans are only the people who live in middle America, and are usually factory workers or farmers. Oh, and they're usually not highly educated, and are disdainful of people who are.<br/><br/>The truth is: Poor people, minorities, immigrants, GLBTs, and educated people are all also "working people"!!! And they also care about our national defense!!!<br/><br/>Just because Democrats ALSO care about their civil rights doesn't mean we've abandoned the "real" Americans who don't care about those things. We do both!<br/><br/>The false dichotomy that the Right has pushed is solely rooted in demonizing "people not like us."
this is why the dems lost. there arent any of them left...how much is enough?
Please.  Get real.  Are you really quibbling about a few hundred thousand dollars when the new President wants to transfer trillions to the 1 percent?  Let's keep our eyes on the real issues.
Many are saying, he needs to put two children through college. Didn't he, as POTUS make 400K annually, with no mortgage, etc. 
It seems that ALL of our elected officials are unprincipled hookers.  Making a fortune on one's memoirs, post-presidency, should be illegal.  The time spent in office is as the PEOPLE'S President and the stories belong to the nation not the individual.  No one should profit financially as a direct result of having been elected to government service, regardless of their political affiliation.  
This former president is not tone-deaf.  To put it bluntly, he's become greedy.
Obama"s cozing up to Wall Street &amp; cashing out, more than anything else since Clinton"s heartbroken loss &amp; Trump"s daily onslaught to civilization, convinced me that Sanders was right. I no longer struggle on who to vote in 2020. All centrist Dems are as corrupt as business class Republicans. Obama, you've just validated that Trump voters have a point.
You are assuming that Obama will pocket the money. More likely he is using his notoriety for a cause he believes in. He has earned the opportunity.
President Obama led with grace for 8 scandal free years and even if the current occupant rolls back his achievements those achievements are written in history.<br/><br/>I don't begrudge President Obama for accepting the current market price for speeches from accomplished former Presidents.  It's a legal and ethical activity.<br/><br/>The travesty you should focus on is the morally bankrupt current White House occupant, who with his cabinet and advisors is daily soiling the office of the presidency while systematically and unapologetically raping the system and raiding the coffers.<br/><br/>Mr. Obama is a relatively young man and now a private citizen. I wish him and his family well.<br/><br/>It amazes me how we continue to raise the bar on this decent man while lowering the bar to sub earthly levels for the current so called Preisdent.
It sounds rather cagey to me, suggesting that Obama give his speech fees to his "foundation". If the Clinton Foundation is a typical example, then these entities are simply cash laundering businesses set up to protect the owners from taxation. They support the owners family members (like Chelsea) with huge unearned salaries. After his 65 million dollar book deal, Obama should stop taking bribes at all. 
I made a donation to the Obama foundation on the second day of its creation.<br/>I can't imagine that president Obama won't put his fees for delivering speeches in his own foundation. I would feel betrayed if he didn't.
What smells is that Cantor's President, Anshu Jain, was at the helm of Deutsche Bank when the company pleaded guilty to rigging LIBOR and obstructing justice, and as consequence, obtained a deferred prosecution agreement, paid $2.5b, and were forced to fire seven employees, Jain not included.  Jain skipped town a month later with a more respectable resignation, complete with all the obligatory parachutes.  All, during Obama's second term.<br/><br/>So, if in future the question is asked whether DB got away too easy in 2015, we'll have to factor this speech in.  To be honest, the optics are terrible, Obama has got to find a way to wriggle out of this one.  Why can't he just upload his speech to YouTube and ask Schultz to send hyperlink to Anshu?  Or do like GW, give up speaking and take up painting?  Because Obama's still surrounded by snowflakes, that's why.  
I have no problem with Obama, Hillary Clinton, or anybody,  accepting the going rate for a speech. Why not? If somebody would pay me $400,000 to speak at an event, I'd be signing that contract immediately. Susan B. Anthony got paid for her speeches. It's what you do with your life and your wealth that counts. Do you give back? 
Leave him alone .. He has every right to make a lot of money like Trump
Just wait until the current president starts cashing in ... oh, wait, it seems he, and everyone close to him, already is. 
Why can't he set a higher standard? Well, hypocracy starting in a church pew on Chicago's South Side comes to mind. For eight years, the media gave him an opportunity to begin developing the next generation of true leaders. And, in a flash, we now learn it was mostly smoke and mirrors.
Only Republicans are allowed to make money. No Democrat ever had a job anyway, or something like that.
Are you serious?  Why should Mr. Obama accept less than what is frankly a standard speaking fee to address this Wall Street Crowd.  You have no idea what he is going to do with the payment he receives... perhaps he is going to start a non-profit foundation? Or donate a large portion of the money to a cause that promotes humanity.  I am willing to bet that he is not going to be investing in a Luxury Hotel and Golf Course in Dubai.  If you really feel the way you do... why aren't you currently camped out 24 - 7 in front of the White House or Trump's favorite weekend Floridian Golf Coast with a protest sign?  
The absurd bloviating<br/>from this destructive incompetent is beyond the pale. A doubled deficit, a ruined health insurance industry,  open borders, and a Constitution in tatters is just part of his awful legacy. Those claiming all criticism is the product of racism are validating John Podesta, Clinton's campaign manager,  who called the Democratic voter ignorant and gullible and said we depend on that.
President Obama and his Michelle Obama served the country admirable in the face of unprecedented obstruction &amp; relentless racism.  He is as entitled as all former presidents to make as much money as possible from books, speeches, etc.  I've never known a better or more deserving president.  Obama's speeches moved and will continue to move people to action.  Unfortunately for the country, Hillary Clinton's speeches did not.  Obama won't be running for office again.  Thus, the people paying him to speak are not buying influence as they did with Hillary Clinton.  The first ex-African American U.S. President should follow the examples set by all the white ex-presidents of the U.S.
There are many comments supporting Former President Barack Obama's right to capitalize on the office he held .<br/><br/>I agree but to test whether this was a view about philosophy or of the man I substituted Donald J. Trump for BHO.  Interestingly my view changed to one of agreement with the editorial.<br/><br/>Maybe the moral is the how one executed the duties of the office determines whether or not profiting from it is acceptable.
Who cares? I went to a conference because Fahreed Zakaria was speaking. Having someone like Obama or Hillary is a draw and will ensure more people attend.<br/><br/>They are not bribing them. They are paying for something. As long as they are up-front, then I don't have a problem.<br/><br/>I would do it, too, if someone would pay me that much money. Wouldn't you?
Mr. Obama will train the elite's young to lead as he did.  Sad.  They too will cash in.  Pathetic.  Fake change we can believe in.  
I have an idea, let's wait until the CURRENT president leaves, or at least stops using the White House as an ATM!  Watch Trevor Noah's take on this!
Twin book deals for President and Mrs. Obama worth 65 million dollars? Bearing in mind the short shelf life of most books, including presidential memoirs, those books will pack one tremendous wallop. They can not be worth that sum under any circumstances.<br/><br/>$400,000 for a speech. How much is that worth per golden word?<br/><br/>Money talks, even for the Obamas. 
Though I have been a NYTimes reader for more than 25 years, it was the Times and other major dailies who kept giving Trump endless, free coverage of his smarmy campaign of hate, racism and narcissism. <br/><br/>So now you can't give Mr. Obama some slack while he sorts through his early, post-president era. He is already missed. Make no mistake, Michelle and Barack will make good use of the funds they generate. Like former president Jimmy Carter, they will show us what well-funded compassion and empathy can do. <br/><br/>Where was the Times editorial board more than a year ago? You thought the buffoon from Trump Tower was entertaining enough to sell more advertising while assuming he could never win.<br/><br/>Well, the baffoon occupies the Oval Office, unless he is in Mar a Lago on our dime. Nice job, editorial board. You accept some of the heat for creating this monster.  You had more than a year to call him out with forceful reportage but gave him a pass as comedy relief in a crowded GOP primary season. From the major dailies to the major broadcasting networks, it was all just too much fun to take seriously, until it was too late. <br/><br/>A little mea culpa is due from the Times editorial board.
He's worth it!  In fact, Obama is worth a lot more than that.  
Can't wait until 2024 after Trump's second term to read this Editorial page.  Let's see if it's as rational.
I would wish that Barack and Michelle were more like Jimmy and Roseanne<br/>Carter...but they are not.....and most likely never will be.....the post presidential<br/>roles of the Carter are hard to match....but the Carters were and still are<br/>on a mission to serve selflessly.....Eleanor Roosevelt served selflessly....<br/>and <br/><br/>I do not expect Donald J. Trump to be anything more than he has always been.<br/>He is simply "to big for his boots" at this time...and his crassness is just<br/>becoming more of a "black eye" for the USA......he is the most vulgar man who<br/>has ever been in the Oval office..
I just don’t understand the value Mr. Obama brings to Wall Street or these corporate boards.<br/><br/>Clearly his presidency was a failure, e.g., doubling our national debt, diminishing America’s clout in geopolitics, and hyper politicizing not just the government bureaucracy but the judiciary.  His legacy is Donald J. Trump<br/><br/>As times goes on, and we see how electing Chief Executive a man who never served as an executive was such a huge setback, it strikes me that more likely BHO-insiders will deny being associated with him.
So you naysayers think WALL ST should get a free ride from an ex-Pres? You gotta be kidding me.
Do as I say, not as I do....<br/><br/>Most politicians don't believe in what they say, including Obama.  They use the talk to garner votes so they can lead a life of luxury.  To think otherwise is to delude yourself.<br/><br/>I also found it funny that the NYT had to work in a Trump slam in an article about Obama taking a ridiculous payday where he makes 10X the average worker's annual salary in 90 minutes.  Just call it hypocrisy and spare us the Trump slam.
Observe how the plutocracy despises Jimmy Carter for failing to take its money.<br/><br/>These people really need to be shown that their money is no good here.
Doesn't Obama care that this will sour voters even more about the bona fides of the Democratic party? 
Obama’s confession was good for his soul, but he shouldn’t be so hard on himself, he never claimed to be the rising of Reverend King. He was &amp; is the epitome of a decent human being, who tried his best to help the poor &amp; in particular African Americans.<br/>You never know what you had until you lose it, he is more than ever missed.
It's funny to read this comment board - everyone twisting themselves into pretzels trying to justify and rationalize what Obama is doing.  Situational ethics is not considered a good thing folks.
While I agree that it would send a pointed message if Obama announced that he was going to donate any speaking fees rather than accumulate them for his own enrichment, how do you know he isn't already planning to do just that? Why no mention of the fact that the Obamas donated $1,000,000 while Barack Obama was president? By the way: he does have children.
I agree that it looks liked deferred payment for influence.  But, what is Obama going to do with the money and what is he going to say?  He is a private person now and if he wants to jetski with the super rich - he can. If he wants to give a speech to investment bankers asking them to do more for the less fortunate - he can.<br/>Maybe he will use the money and connections to bring about change. Do you really think he has sold out? Come on NYT editorial board -you know the guy.
Thanks Obama for not being a saint!  I mean seriously, this ship sailed long long ago.  There are quite a few folks who have big payouts for little effort, so why single out Obama? Frankly I would love the Obamas to become billionaires and then set up think tanks, foundations and PACs and donate lots of money to worthy causes.   This seems to be the only way redistribution of wealth is acceptable to a large segment of the population who are reflexively anti-tax.
Last night on 60 Minutes former Governor Bob McDonnell was interviewed about his exoneration by the Supreme Court for accepting cash and expensive gifts while in office. Now Barack Obama will make $400,000 for a speech at a Wall Street firm after writing things like you quote at the start of your editorial. <br/><br/>There doesn't seem to be anyone in elected politics with a sense of propriety or shame. 
Return the money, Mr. Obama, and please quit asking me for donations to preserve your "legacy." It breaks my heart.
The first few comments nailed it.  It's a matter of distracting from the egregious policies of the current president by nitpicking, in order to dismiss Obama and his policies.<br/><br/>Sounds like Bannon's work.
$400,000.00 is chump change compared to the current US government’s institutionalized "PAY TO PLAY" criminal access to the US treasury via No-Bid contracts awarded to the MIC Donor Class, "PAY TO PLAY" treasonous foreign government "Chinagate" type actions to benefit foreign enemy nations, and other bribery transactions by our elected US Federal government administration officials from past presidents and other elected government officials as the normal institutionalized way of doing government business.<br/><br/>The very worst of the "PAY TO PLAY" no-bid US government contract awards might be President Obama's $650,000,000.00 CGI Federal ACA software contract to create the new "Obamacare exchange web portal" website. <br/><br/>This interactive website could have been created for a tiny percentage of that amount. This was a gigantic waste of taxpayer's money?<br/><br/>Ask any of your computer programmer friends how much their company would have charged to create the ACA "Obamacare exchange web portal" website.<br/><br/>Was the remainder of that $650 million CGI Federal government no-bid contract just "PAY TO PLAY" free cash money paid to campaign contributors?<br/><br/>I believe that some of the people in President Obama’s government administration need to be arrested, tried, convicted and then sent to prison if US taxpayer citizens want this type of corruption to dis-continue.
Some of your readers are asking why Barack Obama should be held to a higher standard than his predecessors.  I'll tell you why - because he purported to hold himself to the loftiest of standards, and veritably oozed a thick aura of being a cut above.  Does he really want to roll down the hill to meet the legacy of the money-grubbing Clintons, the silver-spoon Bushes, the Reagans and their smart Hollywood set, and "Rancho Mirage" Jerry Ford?<br/><br/>No wonder the working class has turned against the Democrats.
Who cares about Obama making some money. Trump is making money in office which is really against the interests of our country.
I think we are learning is that only white men may "rake it in."  Women and people of color may not.  
This editorial borders on the mean spirited. The man started off his career helping the most needy. Then he spent eight bruising years attempting to scale up those efforts as president, while also doing his best to undo the sinister doings of his predecessor. He brought class, dignity and intelligence but also a much-needed earthiness to the land's highest political office. Since Carter, he was arguably the most personally sincere president, and one of the greatest intellects to have served in the Oval Office. <br/><br/>The man went prematurely gray, and likely shortened his life by a few years. And then we expect him to act one way or another AFTER he did all that? After all he's tried to accomplish, against entrenched odds and artificial obstacles, Pres. Obama can run around NYC naked randomly slapping babies and still have my deep respect. 
The gold standard for post-presidency has been set thanks to Jimmy Carter.  The book deals ought to be enough.  Repeat, enough.  President Obama, please leave the money grubbing to others.
So he's earning a living from being Barack Obama. I don't care. Good for him. <br/><br/>Nor do I care that Hillary Clinton earned large speaking fees from being Hillary Clinton.<br/><br/>What I care about are laws enacted. <br/><br/>And The Grifter Impresario currently defiling 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.<br/><br/>And the resurgence of the false notion that tax-cuts are self-financing.<br/><br/>Show me how Barack Obama's speaking fee is about those things instead of just being, tsk-tsk, unseemly and I'll take a listen.
Communism for the masses, not the elites.
Barrack Obama is simply being who he has always been.  The man this author, and many others have seen and imagined is a fabricated myth.  Political packaging for the masses.  He is as he was and will always be.
Outside our lovely restaurant on the Upper East Side at dinner on Saturday night, right next to the diners at their sidewalk tables, a ragged, filthy homeless man pawed through the trash can on the corner, came up with the remains of a discarded milkshake, and started drinking it with a grin through the dirty straw.  I'm sorry, but that is what President Obama should be talking about.  That is what he should dedicate his life to ... the issues of savage economic inequality in America, poverty, racial healing, doing good and caring.  Remember "Hope and Change?" The $400,000.00 speech is blasphemy.
After leaving office, Reagan took $1M from Japan. No one uttered a sound. President Obama never took a vow of poverty, he isn't a socialist or communist.<br/><br/>Why must the first African American President be the first President to decline a speaking fee, or, ask for less?
Obama is "tonedeaf" for accepting big speaking fees from Wall Street?  But you, New York Times, endorsed in the Democratic primary Hillary Clinton, who had spent the months leading up to the primary season accepting millions of dollars of speaking fees from Wall Street.<br/><br/>Despite Bernie Sanders' pointing out that taking millions from Wall Street bankers was a betrayal of common Americans, you, New York Times, went all-in for Hillary.<br/><br/>Talk about hypocrisy.  How about accompanying this editorial with an apology to Bernie Sanders?  How about an apology to the millions of Sanders supporters among Times readers?<br/><br/>Tone deaf, indeed!
What a jarringly naive op-ed piece. What rock has the author hidden under these past 8 years to emerge and reluctantly conclude that the Obama's appear to be as corrupt as their predecessors, when the evidence was there from the first 100 days of his first term? <br/><br/>It's time influential journals judge American political leaders by what they do as opposed to what they say. Speech means nothing. Actions mean everything. <br/><br/>Obama bailed out Wall Street and asked nothing in return. Obama refused to prosecute bankers who engaged in fraud. Obama refused to break up banks too big to fail. Obama presided over a recovery for the rich only. Obama did not intervene to prevent financial institutions neutering reform. Obama did nothing for the vast swathe of citizenry mired in debt, foreclosures, stagnant wages, offshoring. Obama presided over healthcare pseudo-reform crafted by lobbyists for the for-profit racketeers that preserved all their shameful, secretive tricks for running up bills. <br/><br/>Of course the corporate sector would want to pay him handsomely for his fidelity to them and betrayal of us. Of course he would want to vacation on a billionaire's yacht surrounded by financiers and celebrities. This is who is he.
This issue involves ex-presidents cashing in. Most of them do it, with speeches, books and other lucrative gigs.  Who cares? The problem is when a serving president uses his job to enrich himself. Stop ignoring the serving "grifter in chief".
This is editorial is hogwash.  Con-man/Carnival barker Trump fooled enough people to win, yet this is somehow due to Hillary making paid speeches.    <br/><br/>"The tens of millions that Hillary Clinton raised from speaking to corporate interests most likely haunts her now — or should."  Trump is a corporate interest unto himself.<br/><br/>Democrats are "...out of touch with the concerns of the American people"?<br/><br/>The party that is unilaterally responsible for creating the ACA creating access to healthcare for nearly all Americans, the party that wants to raise the minimum wage for all, that wants to make college easier to afford for all, that wants to keep our water, air and food healthy and clean for all, that wants to actually do something about climate change, somehow doesn't have the interests of all Americans in mind?  <br/><br/>The Dems sold themselves poorly, no doubt, but that's not about corporate speech-making.  The Republican party does propaganda better.  Simple as that.  <br/><br/>They have a strong track record of successfully manipulating voters' perceptions so they will vote against their own interests.  Their latest example:  Trump's Tax Plan for the benefit of millionaires and billionaires.  <br/><br/>If the best the Times can do is editorialize in a way that essentially regurgitates the GOP's propaganda machine, it demonstrates a lack of critical thinking on your part.
I have to agree with the editorial. For the first time I could describe Obama as a hypocrite. It pained me to look at him as another hypocrite. He needs to make the transcripts available. But I am still at a loss why? He just signed a lucrative book deal but I guess maybe we have this greediness quotient in us but not Harry Truman or Jimmy Carter!!! It is not too late Obama!!!
The Obamas are starting a foundation whose work will include “training and elevating a new generation of political leaders in America,” <br/><br/>His goal, just like his speeches.  It reminds me of a glossy restaurant menu.  It looks good, but, the delivered result comes up lacking.  
Ex president was always the gig he really wanted.
Barrack Obama's ability was never high to develop a high ethic.  Obama appears to use a simple model of ethics based on what he studied -- the law.<br/><br/>To assume Obama is a top intellect is a mistake.  He is however consistent with his own set of ethics.  Don't expect more.
You don't mention his first public appearance at a Chicago event on community organizing, and you don't mention that the "Wall Street" speech is on healthcare.   
Though it isn't common, remember, you are dealing with a man of character.
To any thinking person, Mr. Obama is now clearly sharing with the world what his values are.
False equivalency. Nothing the Obamas do can compare to the egregious practices of the Trump Family.  Nothing.<br/><br/>The Trump administration is making obscene money from their businesses, branding their products/name and employing their executives in the White House while they are still running their businesses. The tax and trade policies they support also benefit their businesses and their cronies far more than they benefit the majority of the American people.  <br/><br/>The republicans and the trump family are turning the US into a banana republic.  That should be your headline...every single day.<br/><br/>Take a lesson from the republicans and don't shoot your best messengers.  The number of stories on Clinton's unimportant emails did not help her election...this story does not help democrats in 2020.
Accepting $400K for this speech echoes Obama's acceptance of the Nobel Peace Prize despite having done nothing to deserve it.  Deep down, the man has no shame.
This New York Times editorial today reads: "The tens of millions that Hillary Clinton raised from speaking to corporate interests most likely haunts her now — or should."<br/><br/>The New York Times Editorial Board noted in their February 26, 2016 editorial entitled "Mrs. Clinton, Show Voters Those Transcripts" that in her previous public response to this same call by Bernie Sanders and others, Hillary Clinton had “condition[ed] her releases on what the Republicans might or might not do.” The Editorial Board termed this response “mystifying.” And, then added by way of explanation: “Republicans make no bones about their commitment to Wall Street deregulation and tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans. Mrs. Clinton is laboring to convince struggling Americans that she will rein in big banks, despite taking their money.”<br/><br/>Interestingly enough, the Editorial Board of the New York Times never again asked Hillary Clinton to release the transcripts of her speeches. Now, the Editorial Board says: "The tens of millions that Hillary Clinton raised from speaking to corporate interests most likely haunts her now — or should." If Hillary had won the presidential election instead of only her victory over Bernie Sanders for the Democratic Party nomination, the Editorial Board of the New York Times would not have said another word about this fault.
Hillary was penalized for her speeches to Wall Street, e.g,, because we didn't know what she said to them and she wouldn't let us know.  We suspected pandering.  <br/><br/>The rich (including Wall Street) are not evil by definition (try telling that to Elizabeth Warren of the embarrassingly sloppy analogies).<br/><br/>Obama is not running for office, is not being funded or "bought."   <br/><br/>Let's see what Obama has to say in those speeches.  And let's see what the Obamas do with their money.  
I think this is his payoff for not having put one Wall street banker in jail.
“Since Gerald Ford enriched himself with speaking fees and board memberships after leaving office, every former president but Jimmy Carter has supped often at the corporate table.”<br/><br/>This is what makes Jimmy Carter the greatest living ex-president of all time.  Obama proves that once you have supped at the corporate table, it’s hard to go back being a community organizer.  “Not that there is anything wrong with that,” as Seinfeld was wont to say on his show.<br/><br/>Obama may have earned his vacation and his payday, but he is likely losing his moral authority.  Whatever happened to “we are the change we seek?”  We laugh at President Trump today, but who knows, he might become the next Jimmy Carter after his one-term presidency?  In politics, as in life, stranger things have come to pass!
Leave Obama Alone. He was president for eight years. That experience is unlike any other in the world. His insights are worth whatever anyone wants to pay him. He is not cheating anyone, or taking bread out of anyone's mouth. He did not get a multi-million dollar golden parachute when he left office. He does not come from a rich family. He's just brilliant and articulate with an intellect that has and is affecting change in the world. Meanwhile we have a POTUS who is personally profiting while in office, with deals in place we don't even know about because he won't release his tax returns. Really NYT? Damage his brand? Is he supposed to work for less than less able individuals? Obama Is Worth Every Penny. 
There is nothing wrong with Barak Obama giving paid speeches, nor writing books. He and his family have served this country with honor and distinction. The editor's indignation would be better targeted at the sitting President who refuses to release his tax returns, is in violation of the enoluments clause in the Constitution, refuses to place his assets in a blind trust, practices rampent nepotism, and is turning the oval office into a Trump money msking machine. 
"As a couple and a family, the Obamas brought grace, empathy and high standards to their time in the White House, in stark contrast to the workaday vulgarity of its current occupants."<br/><br/>Proof that this is indeed an opinion piece.
One wishes otherwise, but this is part of a broader pattern of Obama serving ruling class interests, such as bailing out the stockbrokers after the 2008 crash but not the underwater homeowners. He could have remade the system but did the bidding of Goldman Sachs. He talks a good talk but walks a different walk. <br/><br/>And why, anyway, are blacks, women and Democrats held to a higher standard? This sick system functions, in part, because it is only "OK" for a seemingly few of us  to act like brazen criminals and jerks while the rest of us are supposed to be humble, obedient and ever poorer. 
Harry Truman, a man without money, went back to live in his mother-in-law's home in Independence.  The offers for speeches and paid positions to join  various corporate boards rolled in.  Truman said:  "They don't want me; they want the President."  He declined.  Times have changed.   Ronald Reagan accepted $1 million for a week in Japan and both Clintons have been in the speech-for-hire business for years.   I don't consider this a betrayal.
Money has become the main if not the only motivation for entering politics. This has distorted our democracy and the results cost taxpayers billions.
How does the NYT know what Mr. Obama plans to do with any money he is paid?<br/>If he buys his own yacht, his own jet airplane and ends up owning a building with his name on it in gold letters, then your fears would be confirmed.<br/>But how likely do you think that will be?<br/>I see Obama far more likely to follow the example of Warren Buffett and Bill &amp; Melinda Gates.<br/>I'm not any richer than the average NYT reporter, but I'm not cynical enough to believe *every* rich person is bad. 
Perhaps Obama is taking a calculated risk by entering the game playing a different role and asserting influence from within rather than control from the outside. It is a different frame and requires a belief in possibility to influence the field upon which the game is played. Influence is more powerful than imposed control because it has the possibility of changing minds. Become the board upon which the game is played.
I don't believe President Obama has any chance of running short of money in his lifetime. He has no personal need for $400k speaking fees, and to take them is demeaning to what I had hoped his presidency could stand for.<br/><br/>If the money is be be used constructively for society - perhaps for something like women's health in poor areas, job creation among coal miners, educational support for inner cities then more power to him. <br/><br/>If it's to enhance his personal wealth I consider it to be "selling his presidency", which is something that belongs to us, not him. In this case shame on him!
Money corrupts.  As I have commented previously about Obama when he was President, Obama, through, his policies, both domestic and foreign, showed that he was not truly liberal nor progressive.  His domestic policies threaded the needle between benefiting the poor, lower and middle class and corporate interests.  His foreign policies belied the promises he had campaigned and the lofty values that the US is supposed to aspire to.  His words did not always reflect his deeds.  Despite the protestation of his supporters that he was different, he did not rise above what was expected of the mere politician.<br/>I'm not surprise.  In fact, I expect that he will be cashing in big time and just fade away.
Obama was grossly underpaid for his extremely demanding and exemplary service as President. The present demand for his thoughts reflects the quality of his work for the public.<br/>Were he to speak to the NRA and agree with there agenda, whether for money or not, he would be in the wrong. To whom he may speak is less important than what he has to say to any particular audience. His message is more important than his fee.
FDR wouldn't have been offered speaking fees by wall street firms because they hated him. The issue here is WHY he's getting these fees, and the sad answer isn't just that he's an inspiring and prominent figure... it's what he did not do as president: prosecute wall street's leaders and force the firms to curb their foreclosures. As a result of his failure to force the industry to behave more responsibly, he can get these fees.  
While I am somewhat disappointed the Mr. Obama took such a large fee for speaking (not that Wall Street can't afford it), I would have rather have had him designate his foundation as the recipient. I would also hope he can provide some insight to the Streeters about why the rest of the country dislikes (hates?) Wall Street. He certainly is not hurting for income, what with the book deals he and Mrs. Obama have signed. Directing all his fee to his foundation would have set a precedent and shown a distinct differentiation between himself and the present president.
There is nothing immoral or inappropriate in a former president addressing people of power and influence, or in being paid whatever they are willing to pay for it.  I'm sure the Obamas will put the money to good use.  Possibly some of his audience will put his message to good use.  Sounds like a win-win situation to me.<br/><br/>Critics of this practice should remember that former presidents have considerable necessary expenses that the rest of us do not.  Our taxes do not continue to pay for security arrangement for former presidents' children past the age of 16.     
Anyone who pays $400K for a speech must expect something in return. President Obama will never be an ordinary private citizen, and we can expect to continue to hear from him. He may be more able than most to resist the sense of obligation that anyone might feel after receiving such largesse. But even if he gives away all of the money, it comes with a cost: his credibility.
This is ridiculous.  He's making a speech about health care to people who influence the decision-makers in Washington - of which he is no longer one.  That's far more important than how much he's being paid to make the speech.  You have no idea what he's going to do with the money, and it's none of your or anyone else's business.   This is a focus on exactly the wrong thing.  The focus should be on what he says in the speech.  
Obama made me proud throughout his presidency, but I must say I entirely agree with this editorial.
come on..... what ever else obama was he was a disappointment because he NEVER came close to living up to his rhetoric. so now wall street is paying him $400K? big deal. he left the people he entered public life to serve behind in 2009. it was easier to do that then fight for what was right. i am aghast at trump but i do not miss obama.
i find it uninspiring for mr. obama to agree to a paid speech to Wall Street.He has nothing in common with them,at least did not all his life.
"Democrats are seen as more out of touch with ordinary Americans than the party’s political opponents." Really? Why don't you correct and put a stop to this truism? Democrats might need to get help with translating their complex and comprehensive policies into plain everyday language and pick up some American English folksy and un-nuanced masculine speaking style, because smart and wise people indeed talk like Democrats. They talk in full, complex sentences and prose. They sound smart and look smart. That's all. The press needs to go above and beyond the Republican talking points and tactics. They sound simple and appeal to gut feelings but a lot of times are false promises, vulgar accusations, and sweet nothings. It's media's job and the role of the expertly guests to translate Democrats' policy ideas (and Republicans' for that matter) into plain English to a great extent. Do not make the news reports and talk shows hocus pocus, noise making entertainment events that distract and confuse the viewers/listeners and give undeserving validity to the empty rhetoric of the other side. How often have you seen an intelligent, reasoned, and engaging argument by any partisan pundit from the other side? So, prime time news talk shows and editorials need to do their homework and articulate the policies in the way the audiences and ordinary folks can understand and realize what's really in store and at stake in each party's policy proposals. Who's out of touch now?!
You're making my head spin with this one.  Last time I looked, in this country, everyone was free to earn money based on what the marketplace dictated.  If Cantor Fitzgerald wants a FORMER president to speak, then I don't believe it's unreasonable to pay him or her.  What's the option?  Should Obama speak pro bono?  Would you say the same for a former editor of the New York Times or other media company to speak for free?<br/><br/>I would draw the line for someone who is currently in office and can directly influence government.  I think your editorial is worthy of discussion although I disagree with it.  Now, please remain focused on what is illegal and exposing the current administration.  Once the Trump White House is turned out I will be more than happy for them to be paid for their speeches and appearances; just not now while they're in office.
Making money off of, and with, Wall Street is just the latest sad example of why the Democrats lost in 2016 and will continue to lose if the pro-corporate, centrist Clinton-Obama clique retains control of the party as it has by ramrodding Clintonite Tom Perez in to head the Democratic National Committee.  These solid centrists live "in a bubble" of wealth and privilege that keeps them from even seeing, never mind feeling, the effects of massive job loss, mass deportation of 11 million undocumented immigrants, the increasing reality that 24 million will lose their health care, and the very grave and sinister threat to our democracy of the thwarted and so far feeble attempts to determine the extent of collusion between the Trump campaign and Russian agents. The silence of the Democrats is as frightening as the incessant noise and destruction of the Trump Republicans.  If no one, including our former President, is actively fighting for our imperiled democracy, other than the thousands marching in the streets, have we already lost it?
This is a man who campaigned against redefining marriage, then suddenly supported it. He vowed to run his 2008 campaign with public funding, then rejected it. Said lobbyists would never work in his administration, then gave them waivers.  And you're concerned that he's being a bit hypocritical on THIS issue?
What right do we have to criticize Barack Obama, who no longer holds public office, from earning money for his speeches?  How do we know he is not using these fees to fund his foundation or other worthy causes?  We have no right to ask.  We do have the right to ask and to expect the current resident of the White House to reveal the sources and beneficiaries of his extreme wealth.  Where is the drumbeat from the Times editorial board on this most important issue?
If I was sitting on a big pile of Benjamins President Obama would be one of the few people I'd be willing to pay that kind of money to listen to.
Exactly, only liberals and Democrats should hold themselves to suburb standards, only they should compromise on issues even if they are detrimental to citizens and the planet, only they must tell the truth and be polite and follow the orders of the other side. Yes. I get it now. I think it was that old guy Republican president, after Carter, who started this whole thing and then there was the one who lied about weapons of mass destruction while destroying our economy whose post-presidential goal was "to fill up the ol' coffers."
Yes it is something of a hypocrisy. However this is a capitalist country. The mantra is we don't care how you got it, the important thing is that you have it. It would be nice for him to donate these fees. But politics and money have become a symbiotic/parasitic relationship. One cannot operate it seems without the other. The real power brokers in this country are the lobbyists and their special interest money machines. When your time in office is over, then you move the levers and dole out the dollars behind the not so opaque curtain. Trump and his election only serves to prove that what you say to get elected is not consequential. How you get there by whatever means is ok. To me Obama,s legacy is that he was a deeply decent man. He took the high road on almost every occasion. His family was one of the greatest to occupy the White House. And this is still a terribly racist country. Terribly racist world.
I'm less concerned with how much Barack Obama is paid for a speech than I am with what he does with the money. <br/><br/>If he uses it to put a down payment on a mansion in Chicago, I'd be very disappointed. If he gives 75% of it to charity or to a project beneficial to others, I'd say, "Pay him more!"
Mr. Obama is now a private citizen.<br/>He did not "cash in" as a sitting president.<br/>Four hundred thousand dollars?<br/>A couple of memberships could be purchased at the private resort Mar a Lago.
Obama shouldn't accept the money.<br/>But unlike Clinton, he is not running for office, and has no plans to run.<br/>Somehow, the attack on Clinton (about her speeches) survived the primaries (and was still seen as relevant) even when she was running against a self-proclaimed billionaire in the general election, who was: aided by a wall of money from super pacs, ginned up by Citizens United-style funding, given millions and millions of dollars worth of free publicity from the press (while Clinton's coverage was overwhelmingly negative).  Not to mention the millions worth of free propaganda (and espionage) that the Russians clearly helped out with.  (The same billionaire who revealed exactly how to profit from the presidency while IN office)<br/>In the face of this tsunami of money and collusion, I consider Clinton's "emails."<br/>I consider her "speeches."<br/>I see how, by ignoring the background on this, the Times has enough cover to raise this "concern" about how "disheartening" a sign the president's speech is, considering his moral stature and authority.<br/>I actually think it's "okay", even if it is not ideal.  Why must Obama be the first not to take such gigs?<br/>As Trevor Noah pointedly asked, are we not only asking this because he is the first black ex-president?  Everybody condemns "Wall St.".  Trump railed about Goldman Sachs, and then filled his cabinet with it. 
I just don't share the obsession with our ex-presidents' incomes. I care a great deal about how our presidents get to be president, and about what they do while they are president, but surely if anyone has earned the right to do whatever he wants, it is someone who has honorably fulfilled the relentless demands of the presidency.<br/><br/>I felt the same way 40 years ago when Gerald Ford left office and joined corporate boards as a highly paid outside director. Good for him! He spent his entire career serving in government, and if he wanted to make some bucks at the end of his life, I didn't begrudge him. <br/><br/>I deeply respect Jimmy Carter, who I regard as our greatest ex-president. His commitment to humanitarian causes, fair elections and international peace is highly admirable. But I hold no grudge against any president, Barack Obama included, who is able to be well paid for giving speeches. (Even Jimmy Carter, I presume, gets paid for the books he writes - which is itself a form of "cashing in.") We have more than enough to do keeping tabs on our current president; I say we leave our ex-presidents alone.<br/><br/><a href="http://politicsbyeccehomo.wordpress.com" title="politicsbyeccehomo.wordpress.com" target="_blank">politicsbyeccehomo.wordpress.com</a>
The double minded man says one thing and does another.  If this isn't the case here I'm not sure what is.
President Obama is relatively young.  He has two daughters to educate.  He has a right to earn a living.   Would you rather have him get a job with some large corporation?  I have no doubt that a large portion of what the Obamas earn will go to the causes that they care about.  I am not worried that their values will be compromised by their association with wealthy people.  More likely, they will use that to encourage those people to join with them in supporting the many good works that will typify their post White House years. 
A neoliberal is a neoliberal is a neoliberal. Period.
It is sad that there is no one to carry on Obama's legacy, but why does he have to carry on in the style  of the Clinton's?
At least he didn't profit from the presidency while he was still in office like our current president does every single day.
"For the first time in memory, Democrats are seen as more out of touch with ordinary Americans than the party’s political opponents.”  <br/><br/>And just what pray tell does a  billionaire in the White House filled with the swamp and  selling snake oil have in common with ordinary Americans?
How well do you know Mr. Obama after eight years of hard service and love for our Country?  Perhaps you believe that he is at ease and at his best with the 1% Elite in our midst?  There is nothing about the former President that is shady or uncertain, confusing or malignant in this extraordinary visionary who led us out of the Great Recession with little help.<br/><br/>His detractors will say that he is weak.  Try working in his office first when he is somber and a storm is gathering, his brow turning thunderous, and this American would go low-profile.  Do you really believe after all these years that   Mr. Obama would blightly accept an extravagant fee for a speech for the pleasure of filling his coffer with gold coins?<br/><br/>He knows that money is a tool and that it can corrupt and warp one's soul.  $400,000 is a lot of lucre and could be a down-payment for an estate in Upstate New York with a golf course.  It can also be invested and lost on Wall Street on a long day's journey.<br/><br/>The Obama Foundation is in need of funds to fully implement a healthy and safe future for our Next Generation.  An elderly sibling of mine of inherited wealth in Real Estate recently wrote of Trump, Taxation and Taxes, 'in addition, with our idiotic president', well, that sums it up very neatly.<br/><br/>Thank you, Mr. Obama, you always give this America hope and I hear you  clearly because of your nobility and courage, your attitude and strength, your ability to encourage some of us to do better.  
College for two daughters isn't going to pay for itself.
to make political mistakes is one thing, but for a moral leader to make moral mistakes goes at the heart of a morally defining president... shape up sir!
Yes, he's like the fat cats who have a sip of fine French wine and cannot go back to drinking Gallo.
So, you think he should not get paid for his speeches.  Silly notion.  I believe Obama has a message that is important for the 1 percenters to hear, and doing it for free would not make any difference to them other than they would discount him as being stupid.  Also, Dems must raise funds to compete in elections.  The best way to raise funds is to approach people who have funds.  Being a Democrat doesn't require an oath of poverty like a Catholic nun!
He may be getting high fees for speaking, but this is a cheap shot from the Times and other critics. Why shouldn't he secure the future of his family? Why should he be held to a different standard from the plethora of rich white guys in Congress? One doesn't necessarily abandon one's principles with the acquisition of wealth. We're just so used to watching rich miscreants in government, like McConnell and Trump, who never had any principles to begin with, that we paint everyone with the same brush. I'm not an uncritical Obama supporter, but the self-righteous tone of this piece is way out of line. 
President Obama, donate this fee to a worthy cause of your choosing, please.  Ask yourself:  what would President Carter do?
Elevate and donate - noble thoughts, indeed, but the Obamas should do it the same way that the 99% do, i.e., no personal benefit to the donor.
Adulation of the Golden Calf is a universally spread religion. However, even at today's prices in devalued dollars, one wonders, what could be worth $400,000 in an ex-President's speech.
This isn't anything new for him. Obama has always been about what is best for Obama and sacrifice is what he tells others to do. Narcissistic behavior has been his operation since the beginning, but he wears the cloak of blackness to protect him from criticism from those who followed him but are too weak minded to admit they made a mistake 
I find it interesting that people are so ready to hop on the Obamas for financial gains since leaving the White House when it's been a long standing tradition of past presidents. Are we holding him to a higher standard fairly? And, how about we see what he and Michelle do with their book advances and speaking fees before we condemn them. 
I agree with you.  Obama should treat Wall Street Money as "Poison Pills".  If he wants to give them some moral lessons, he should name a charity such as Planned Parenthood and ask the host to donate whatever they wish not to be discloled to anyone other than the IRS.
Speakers at Obama's level work through agencies that source potential clients and arrange the speech. Of course, Obama would be consulted and he could turn down the speech for any reason at all. After negotiations, the agent says, "Mr. Prez, we got XX firm on XX date for $400,000; shall I book it?" Obama says yes or no. <br/><br/>I do speeches too, although the $400,000 offer is still in the offing. I look upon it as part of my job as an independent consultant. Every offer I've received has come from a company or organization that does things that someone somewhere doesn't like. Including financial firms and (sorry) big, very big pharma. <br/><br/>No one has asked for transcripts of my talks, but I'd happily provide summaries — if you'd consider hiring me. Waddayasay?
This column ignores the most likely explanation of the apparent conflict between what Obama said back then and what he is doing now.  That is, that he was not being completely honest about his motivations and goals in running for office.  Given the way he governed, I would say its most likely that he was always in it for power and ego and now, like the Clintons, sees the opportunity to convert that into $$$.  I voted for him the first time but he only fooled me once.  He still has the NYT Editorial Board fooled.  
With all the damage to the country and presidency that DJT is doing right now, and you're saying Obama shouldn't give a speech or write a book?  Give me a break.  
Give me a break!<br/>President Obama served eight years in the most difficult job in the world for  $400,000 a year, while CEOs of mediocre companies were making millions. (The CEO of the parasitic private health insurer, United healthcare, made $66 million!)<br/>I have no problem with him earning whatever the market will bear. Furthermore, Wall Street executives are exactly the people that should pay attention to his expertise and perspective. Perhaps they will acquire a moral center.<br/>I am surprised at the narrow view of the Times editorial staff....
As Retired Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the USA, will he take money for speeches given to governments or groups known to have government connections? I bet he will; and get away with it!
Is the system such that the amount of payment for Obama's speech needs to be made public?
"...a president keenly attuned to the worries and resentments of the 99 percent"?<br/>Are you kidding? Then how did Obama and Hillary misjudge the election so badly? I never thought Obama was keenly attuned to the 99%, so much as keenly attuned to the Democratic base: wealthy liberals and minorities.
The Democratic Party sold out to the financial institutions under Clinton and has profited ever since. The banks contributed heavily to Obama's candidacy and then Obama supported the financial  rescue of the banks during the Great Recession and refused to prosecute the grifters whose dishonest schemes caused the crash.  Now the country is owned by the oligarchs and the Parties are their paid servants.  Wake up.
Sadly, Barack Obama (and Michelle) are lifetime members of the political elite made wealthy through government service. It speaks volumes, does it not, that the much reviled Jimmy Carter is the only modern President who managed to serve the nation both as President and then as dutiful citizen.<br/><br/>The difference between the Obamas, the Bush father and son, the Clinton's and the Carters is that the latter are true public servants, a breed that has all but disappeared from public life.
"... in contrast to the workaday vulgarity of its current occupants." Oh boy, do I take exception to THAT wording! There is nothing "workaday" about Trump. He is vulgarity personified, but don't insult the hardworking people of this country by calling it, "workaday."
How judgmental! Should Obama speak for free to support some moral standard made all the more critical by the conduct of our new CLOWN IN CHIEF? NO.<br/><br/>I understand the hypersensitivity of many folks about Trumps hidden tax returns, his incessant lies, and a White House that daily resembles a version of Idi Amin's corrupt Uganda in steroids. But this Obama should work for free article is not a solution.<br/><br/>I hope Obama continues his life as a private citizen, and gets paid for speaking engagements and other work that he does.<br/><br/>A large swath of our country supports all that Trump does despite his glaring incompetence, and reduction of the presidency to the role of the recalcitrant but chest beating novice. It is horrible to analyze and watch. A reality show that's affecting REAL lives. A horror comparable to nothing in recent American history.<br/><br/>The job of the media is not to focus on these types of banal go no where tales, but on crafting a method to cross partisanship in their writing, so that MOST of America rejects this chaotic presidency of Donald John Trump.<br/><br/>Let Obama live as a private citizen. Face the master of chaos and ignorance in the WH. 
Do we know what the former President will do with the speaking fees he receives? Maybe he will donate the money to his foundation or other causes, but you don't know so don't assume.
The man is human, he isn't Mother Theresa. President Obama will most likely play a few more rounds of golf and buy his wife a nice piece of jewelry. Most will probably be invested and the rest donated  to worthy causes.  We won't hear about him bidding on over inflated art at Christies or crash landing vintage airplanes like some people we know.
Never been an Obama supporter but here I find nothing wrong with his actions. Why should he not make money giving speeches. More power to him. 
Why is it that women and minorities are supposed to serve as exemplars? 
Good for him. He's supporting his family. However, if you think, like this author, that he didn't "stay true to his values" you haven't been paying attention. Since the day he got into the white House who did he hang out with? Celebrities and rich business owners. Remember the multi.million dollar vacations?  He was just on vacation with Oprah and Tom Hanks. He was never on the side of the little guy. If you don't believe it ask yourself how Trump got elected.
Is anyone surprised?The Obamas have lived "large" prior to,during,and now after his 8 WHouse years.I'd prefer he donate his $400k speaking fee either to charity or their new foundation.My major concern is it proves once again the Democrats say one thing(anti Wall Street) and do another(accept WStreet speaking fees).
Honestly now - how many of you folks reading this would pass up a chance to make $400,000 for a speech? Get off your high horse and give the man a break. He spent 8 years putting up with all sorts of nonsense and abuse - doesn't he get any slack now that he's put in his time? The country and the world are better because of him. What have you done to match that?
President Obama did and still does hold himself to higher standards.<br/>Why shouldn't he be paid for his speeches— he is out of office, starting a foundation and he is completely entitled. This man led with nothing but grace—after what half this nation and press put him through, a million dollars a speech would not be enough.<br/>Keep your focus on the most corrupt and poisonous gang now infecting the White House and our country.  
We live in a superstar world. If you want to book your favourite band for a private concert you pay anywhere between $100,000 to $1m. Barack Obama is clearly a superstar, hence the $400,000 price ticket.
In this country, money speaks the loudest. The Obamas have earned it and<br/>should milk it for all it's worth. There is no doubt they will accomplish<br/>great things for the common good over time. Let's instead stay focused on<br/>the wastefulness and corruption of the current faux administration.
This editorial smacks of something - I am not sure which word to use! I can not believe that simply because President Obama is accepting payment for a speech he is being pilloried as unethical, void of his previous morals and greedy. If he was white? I am not sure this is the point either.<br/>What is a former POTUS, age 50 in the prime of his life possessing a sharp and inquisitive mind supposed to do? Of course he will be one of the most sought after speakers of our time, book deals aplenty will come to him and many positions on boards will be offered.<br/>To suggest that he can not or should not take payment for his future work is hypocritical.<br/>Just how much money do you think Trump will charge for a speech when he leaves office?<br/>Why don't the NYT and the rest of the media go about your business? I am far more concerned about Trump's use of his inaugural slush fund pay-for-play that is currently going on not to mention his daily violation of the emolument clause and all the other ways that Trump is right now making as much money as he can while he is sitting in the Oval Office.
Some people Trump manipulated into voting for him, some he manipulated into writing editorials to help, will they never recognize that they were had?
Why does getting paid to speak mean the President gives up all moral authority?  Isn't it important to have someone OUTSIDE the club telling the plutocrats something they don't hear from their bubblemates?  Reagan got a MILLION dollars to speak and there was very little blow back.  HIllary got lots of money to speak but her policies and programs where nearly the same as Bernie's.  Unless the pay to play system changes (lol) there is no reason to insist that those of us on the left have to forgo the way the system works while the right takes a money bath every chance they get. 
The Obamas together have book deals that could total as much as $65 million. Isn't that enough? Collecting more from Wall Street - especially after the market crash from which so many of us have not yet recovered - looks greedy and opportunistic. To borrow from the current Opportunist in Chief: SAD. 
I can see no harm in the Obamas giving paid speeches for what the market will bear.  They are private citizens and have interesting stories to tell and valuable ideas and perspectives.  Mr. Obama isn't going to write an executive  order favoring whoever paid him.
This is an especially relevant inquiry since the Obama administration passed on any criminal prosecution of Wall Street for its role in the 2008 financial crisis.
Obama was always motivated by his ego thinking he was right, no discussions. He thought he was the smartest guy in the room. He knew how to give a good speech and although he did give us hope at the end of the day it was always about him. While being Mr. Teflon and rubbing elbows with the elites and Hollywood he turned into one of them. He is now truly another obnoxious left wing liberal being driven in his limousine while knowing what is best for the country and the world and raking in the bucks for himself. He will be very good in his new role as he had the Bill and Hillary as his mentors.
Why Barack speaks to Wall St is an interesting question.  Why Wall St pays Barack is even more interesting question.
Obama is no different than the rest of the One Percenters. He just talks a good game and laughs all the way to the Bank!'
All politicians talk the talk... and then walk away with the cash.
It's doubtful that the tens of millions of dollars,Hillary "earned" through her speaking engagements haunt her any more than former Democrat Speaker of the House Jim Wright was haunted by the sales of many multiple copies of his garbage book to wealthy business interests.  Nothing will haunt Hillary other than her humiliating loss to the Donald, which it is hoped will haunt her to her grave.
Editorial Board hits nail on head.<br/>I hope, and expect the Obamas will make a show of donating "ill-gotten gains" to charity. They need a lot of money to support complex lives but they need to display some of Jimmy Carter's humility next to their celebrity selves.
My guess is he'll pay taxes on it....
Does anyone know if he may be donating some of it to charity?
In a capitalist, free market economy Obama has a right to earn whatever people are willing to pay for his products or services.<br/><br/>And for those of you who are disappointed you shouldn't be. Your mythical view of Obama was never true and the evidence was always right there in front of you had you chose to look.<br/><br/>Obama is a classic narcissist who was in it for the power, station and money. He jettisoned the "little people" for the Washington, Hollywood and Wall Street elites the minute he took office.<br/><br/>Let him enjoy the jet set lifestyle. That is all he ever wanted and he worked very hard to become a one percenter.
Here we have it in a nutshell--typical liberal carping that gives what I valuable space in a reputable newspaper to a minuscule issue that has no effect whatsoever on the body politic. The current president funnels massive amounts of cash into his private business and this is what the New York Times is worried about? I am sure that in a private moment the sitting would refer to $400K as "lunch money" if he, in fact, had every in his life picked up the bill for anything.<br/><br/>So in an effort to be fair and balanced you choose to scold a brilliant president. Liberals, it seems, can't abide success. Can you imagine Fox News carping about one of its icons this way.<br/><br/>Let's take a page from the Republicans lock-step support of their party. If we had that, this businessman would not have hijacked our government. 
So here we have the first Black President of the United States who served this country honorably and ably in the face of the worst spew of hatred and disrespect from the Republican Party and specifically and especially from the Republican Congress that was ever cast on any former President.  Obama took all the jibes and turned the other cheek and served with grace and a thoughtful demeanor.  So, Editors, leave the man alone.  They could double or triple the amounts they offer and it would never pay him back for the graceful Presidency he gave us.  
Give him (and me) a break.  This man suffered indignities beyond the pale for 8 years and deserves a lot.  Individuals across the land would most probably collectively donate a billion dollars to get him back in the White House.
I completely agree with this.  It would be one thing if the Democrats had won the election.  But instead, they suffered a humiliating defeat based on the ignored plight of the working and middle classes.  It really, really looks bad, particularly when he was already perceived as being too cozy with Wall St.<br/><br/>As much as we all like to think the Obama's are private citizens, they are not.  Like it or not, he--and every other President who came before him--are standard-bearers for their party.  As the Democrats look inward to dissect what went wrong in 2016, with tone-deafness being very high on the list of problems, this doesn't help the cause to get back in touch with the people who should be their strongest allies.<br/><br/>The current standard isn't good enough.  And in this highly polarized media world in which we live, giving the opposition raw meat to tear to shreds isn't helping.
No matter what Obama does people will still find fault. The same people who are begrudging him making any money are the same ones that have nothing to say about Trump's cabinet picks, his nepotism or the insane amount of money it takes to protect his wife and child in NYC, his children and their families on their far flung vacations and his weekly trips to Mar-o-Lago. I have not doubt that Obama will survive this criticism with the same class as he survive the past 8 years.
The optics are terrible on this one.  But let's put things in perspective, wasn't it incredible of the scandal free administration Obama ran for 8 years.  Compare that to the last one hundred days of Trump.  Trump's family and appointees seem like pigs at the public trough.  Fox News ran with this Obama fee story for days, as if to say, stop complaining on Trump, Obama does the same thing.  Well no.  Here is the difference.  Obama is out of public office and while there, he did much to help blue collar workers.  Remember his bail out of the auto industry and increasing the tax rate on the wealthy.  So NYT lets keep perspective here.  There is a major difference of being disappointed on this sole act and being horrified everyday by Trump's greed.
Anyone notice what major league baseball players are making lately? For doing what again?
Thank you for this editorial. I respect, admire, and miss President Obama. I believe that he will fare well in history when historians consider the circumstances in which he took office, and the challenges he faced as the first African-American president in a nation where racism, explicit or unconscious, runs deep. This, however, is a bad move. The invitation is a way for the Wall St. firm to draw potential clients, using the president as an ad pitch. President Obama must think carefully about who he speaks to, in what settings, and for what compensation. For settings like these, he might give the money directly to non-profit organizations. Is this a double standard for an African-American president? No, I don't think so. It is a reflection of the political urgency of our times. Hillary Clinton was damaged by the justifiable perception that she was too cozy with the financial industry. The wealth gap is the largest in recent history. President Trump's policies will aggravate it. Republicans have skillfully mobilized voters around the charge that Democrats are culturally and economically out of touch. Our political system is in danger; the Democrats are the only viable alternative; they have to mobilize a public and be willing to change the economic landscape. Friends, don't turn this into a Sanders/Clinton replay: move on, it's a bigger issue. If we have two parties that both align themselves with elites, guess which one is likely to win.
Obama can do what he wants, of course. But, the bigger question here is - if presidents go on to accept high speaking fees from banks why should the public believe them when they say they're not indebted to the banks during their tenure as president? This really shouldn't come as a surprise though. Both Obama and Trump attacked Wall Street and then both filled their administration with bankers. Obama was "hope and change" in 2008 and then in 2017 he's taking money from the very institutions that destroyed much of the Democratic base's finances. <br/><br/>Like separation of church and state, there should be a fairly big separation of state and financial institutions. Otherwise, we get what we have now which is an oligarchy. Obama is just putting fuel to the fire here - if he really wanted hope and change he would be a Jimmy Carter, not a Bush or a Clinton. So, again,  he can do whatever he wants but his legacy will be tarnished if he continues down this path. 
While Trump is looting the the US treasury, violating the Emoluments Clause, selling influence, using the presidency as a marketing and profit generating instrument, you're going on about Obama getting paid for a speech post presidency?  Obama had one of the cleanest administrations ever. So Wall St wants to pay him for a speech? They want to pay him to hear his ideas and thoughts about how Wall St should act more altruistically? Fine by me.<br/><br/>Hillary got criticized for the same thing. The subject of her speeches to Wall St? Hire more women. In the meantime, Trump is attempting to engineer the biggest transfer of wealth from the middle and working classes to the ultra rich since Reagan. Keep your eye on the ball!
Is Obama still the leader of the Democratic Party? Last I checked, he is now an ex-president and does not plan to run for any office, removing any conflict of interest. Meanwhile I am watching critics, like Warren and Sanders, continue to assume a political office and yet find time to go on book tours. How is that any better?
When I read about the 400K speaking fee, I cringed a bit. Not because it is not entirely deserved and if that is what market pays, why should not Obama take it? But in the overwhelming realm of hypocrisy and alternative facts we are living in, I was hoping (at least for the first speech) not to give any ammunition to the spin masters. The simple gesture to donate it to ACLU or Planned Parenthood would have gone a long way. 
Everyone wants to be rich.  If I could leverage my life experience to make a bunch of money I would.  I believe that everyone should have that right regardless of their ability.  That is the miracle of our Constitution as it was written.  The issue I have is, Democrats and especially Obama, espouse that everyone should have equal income, that no one should have more than anyone else.  His personal income is contradictory to his beliefs, which means that his beliefs don't apply to him.  This gives insight into what he really believes, that being, that the Socialist elite are deserving of much while the rest of us are deserving of little and that we should be dependent on them completely.  This is the ultimate failure of what he stands for and Socialism as a whole.
I'm not interested in what a pol is paid to speak - I'm interested in his or her policies. All this vilification of Hillary for her paid speeches and yet she's the one who proposed stricter regulations of Wall Street. There was no evidence that her policy proposals were influenced by the cost of her speeches. In fact, focusing myopically on that helped to result in the election of people who will not regulate Wall Street at all if they get their way. <br/><br/>Also, we don't know what Obama is going to do with that money; he may well give most of it to charity or he may just keep it. But either way no assumptions can be drawn from it.  
He's no longer holds an elected office.  Their family risked their lives, and carried a great burden.  Why is he being criticized for earning a living?  Have we demonized wealth?
Asking Mr. Obama to donate the money he makes on his speeches to charity treats Mr. Obama as if he belongs to a league that he by no means belongs to. For a person such as Mr. Obama $400,000 is real money.<br/>There are two types of people who would donate their earnings to charity. The first is a person for whom a sum such as $400,000 is such a small addition to their wealth that they consider it pocket change relative to the amount of money they have. And since pocket change is an insignificant amount of money they will donate it.<br/>Then there is another type of person who donates almost all of the money her earns to charity. And those are or people who are not just rich, in that they already have allot of money, but people like Bill Gates or Michael Bloomberg, who have succeeded in having a setup in which millions upon millions will keep pouring in for years to come. These people are already as rich as they want to be, and so they have little use for the millions that keep pouring in.<br/>However it is a totally different concept to ask a person that is not rich by any means to give away a sum of $400,000, which is what Mr. Obama's yearly salary was when he was president. In fact there is probably not a single person who has Obama's net worth who would view $400,000 as money they would just as well give to charity.
At least President Obama had the good grace to wait until he left  the White House  to capitalize on his term of office.  Perhaps all of the critics forget Bush43's throwaway line about "refilling the coffers" as he left the Presidency.  Contrast both Bush and Obama with Mr. Trump who is assuredly cashing in while in office -- perhaps his actual greatest accomplishment of the first 100 days. Oh yeah, His daughter and son-in-law aren't doing so badly either.
Just as sexual misbehavior hurts Republicans more than Democrats, benefiting from the 1% hurts Democrats more than Republicans. There are assymetries in the parties in terms of misbehaviors that operate more severely against one party or the other. Obama just tripped over one.<br/><br/>Obama the Realist should realize this and announce what charity will benefit from this fee. Preferably one with very low overhead. 
Obama was or nor has been like Mother Teresa - even though, MT was also liked to be with the rich shadows to raise money to look after the Catholic Values but President Obama served the interests of the Wall Street too and he knows what he did and whom he supporte during all the years when he was powerful. <br/><br/>But I like your Editorial - I never read any sound and factual words ever said by Editords in the Western World to powerful figures, in which you politely reminded Obsma that there are other ways to survive after leaving the White House. For example writing books and doing some other reasonable things to make this world a better place. <br/><br/>Does Obama take this path which you suggested? I would never believe because once you have a good relations with the Wall Street, you will always have good relations with Money.
I think $400,000 for a speech is a pretty high standard. How much higher would the New York Times like it to be? <br/><br/>Seriously, if the New York Times (and Washington Post's Ruth Marcus) would like to suggest a comprehensive standard for all office-holders to meet with regards to fees for speaking, they should do it. But to single out a particular example as the one that should meet an undefined higher standard is just posturing. It is the opposite of a serious intention to "get money out of politics" which would start with a declaration for the need for campaign finance reform and overturning Citizens United. <br/><br/>The posturing is getting pretty thin, and it's terribly demoralizing. In the present circumstances the best fix people can come up with is to chastise Barack Obama, who is out of office, for not meeting a standard Trump is not even expected to meet IN office? Please!<br/><br/>If Obama did NOT accept the money for the speeches you can bet Trump and his followers would be talking about how weak he was, what a loser, how Trump could command so much more.<br/><br/>Besides, I have a feeling the Obamas are going to be putting their money to very good purposes -- on behalf of the American people, not against them. Thank heavens somebody is!
Concentrating on one speech by Obama is missing the forest for the trees.  The forest is that reform is needed but what Congress and the States are willing to do and, in fact, did in the past is being undermined by the Supreme Court.<br/><br/>The Supreme Court seems to be intent on flooding our system with money.  Money == Speech!  Corporations == People!  <br/><br/>How do you say these things and then sleep at night, imagining you're doing honorable work?  A financial construct should not have the rights of a person.  It's a sign of how far capitalism is driving out ethics and morality and common sense.  It's a mad, mad world (but because greed and cupidity are winning, not just because the world's randomly crazy).
I think it would do us all a lot of good if the Times would discuss the how and why these lavish paychecks for speeches that aren't even good enough to be mentioned for anything but the pay came to be. Do any of the readers here have in memory a quote or topic of any of these paid speeches?<br/>As I recall we used to have a well regulated society. In essence anyone who worked for in public service could not go to work or take money from an industry they regulated for a number of years after leaving public service. The most egregious case of proof of the necessity for this is, the FCC chair M. Atwell Baker who approved Comcast purchase of NBC Universal, then quit to go work for them a couple months later.<br/>The reason for the enormous payouts for speeches was to overcome these regulations which are now gone, yet the purpose of the speeches remains the same, payoff.<br/>The first example I recall being reported was a reagan official who quit then made a speech to some group made up of those he had regulated where they paid him lavishly. It was discussed in the press whether or not it was the obvious payoff it was. Somehow it was approved and things went downhill fast from there. <br/><br/>Some of those paid this way who haven't or could not have given favor are chosen because they have moral gravitas in society. Their acceptance of the large fee legitimizes this dishonest system of sanctioned bribery by pretending the payoff is for some paid service unrelated to the work. 
Many commenters refuse to think ill of Obama, just like Trump's followers say they still believe in him.<br/><br/>What would Trump and Obama have to do to lose favor from these die hard followers?<br/><br/>My only regret about moving to Provence 14 years ago as an expatriate is that I have to pay income taxes to the US the rest of my life and that some of that money goes to Trump and Obama!
Barack Obama is not being disloyal to anyone. He has a proven track record, and Cantor Fitzgerald values his thoughts. I wonder how many such lucrative offers GWB received.
I am continually amazed at how naïve Obama's followers were and are about who he really is and what he is about. He is about himself, period. All of this caring about the little guy, sticking it to the man was just a means to an end. He considers himself above everyone in the bottom 99.9% and has for most of his adult life. Until you understand and accept that you can never understand the man and will continue to be confused trying to match his words to his actions.
Look at all the hand wringing.  All the sudden it's all about what the market will bear when it comes to a Democrat.  This is why the Obama's get away with so much abusive behavior - no one holds them to account - even when the naked truth is staring you right in the face.  He's all about money and power and that's all there is to it - the rest is just verbiage to placate the chumps. 
This is absurd.<br/><br/>The Trump Administration has gone far beyond the supposed wall-street-friendly and warmongering approach that was supposedly why all those people voted against Hillary. And yet, they still support President Trump.<br/><br/>It's the racism, stupid.<br/>It's the gender bias, stupid.<br/><br/>Please, give this nonsense meme about "the Democratic Party is out of touch" a rest. I applaud the Obama's for getting as much as they can-- I think what really bothers people is that this African-American couple demands much higher compensation, and gets it, than the previous ex-Presidential couples. <br/><br/>They are still the classiest act we have had in that job in my lifetime.
Please stop it with the 50 lashes with a wet noodle, New York Times! Barack Obama is only collecting the deferred compensation for an exhausting eight years of acting, as he himself once put it to Wall Street tycoons, the only thing standing between them and the pitchforks. <br/><br/>Four hundred grand is relatively small change, given the salaries that other, much less talented stars command in our celebrity-saturated culture. Can you imagine if he'd pulled off the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal? His price would be a cool million per hour, easily. <br/><br/>Since his presidential library is estimated to cost well over $1 billion, it will take him years and years of pandering to the wealthy to come up with all that money. Give the poor guy a break.<br/><br/>The real outrage is that Michelle Obama, who is much more popular than her husband, is earning only half of what he makes. She is scraping by on an insulting $200,000 per appearance. Whatever happened to equal pay for equal work? We should all be out in the streets, protesting this inequity.<br/><br/>The Obamas can't help it if they're stuck in a time of class resentment and rising populism and plummeting approval ratings for Democrats. Bill and Hillary had only one daughter to hyper-educate and marry off in a multi-million dollar wedding. Barack and Michelle will have at least double those expenses, what with the costs of luxury living going up all the time.<br/><br/>Just remember the famous motto -- When they go low, we go high... and higher... and higher.
If President Obama had taken the banksters to task, rather than inviting them into his inner circle, in response to economic mess GW Bush handed him, I would have hopes that his speeches to Wall Street could do some good. But no, that and his palling around with billionaires immediately after leaving the WH says a lot. I can't blame him for taking the money -- who would turn down $400K to give a speech? -- but it is nonetheless a sad statement about the times we live in and the corrupting influence of money in our political system. In what world does it make sense for a firm to pay someone $400K to give a speech? What are they getting for that enormous expense? 
I seem to remember him indicating that a person should have a limit on how much wealth they should be satisfied with.  This is why I am critical of him personally getting so much for a mostly worthless speech.   Now I would think it better if the money went to a common charity like say the red cross rather than his personal wealth.  The issue of influence is separate, hopefully little to none.
I do not begrudge Mr. Obama for earning whatever sum he can earn for his post-Presidential work.  This is what any American should be free to do, regardless of his former role or responsibilities.  This sum, however, implies that he can offer more than just words or wisdom----that he can offer some connection to power.  That is the problem, and Mr. Obama's (and Ms. Clinton's) speaking fees are a symptom of the problem, but not the core of the problem itself.  We are no longer a democracy, but a plutocracy, with unlimited opportunities for those connected to Washington, and not so much for the rest of us. This is what both parties have devolved into---- rewarding those in power (and their best friends) at the expense of every other taxpayer.  A quick scan of the net worth of members of Congress will show just how different our elected officials are from most working American men and women. The conflicts of interest in source of income for our elected officials are numerous and frequently quite scandalous.  This can only stop if we are willing and able to implement term limits and serious campaign finance reform.  I am not holding my breath.....
I've read articles and columns about President Obama's upcoming speech on some politics-oriented, non-partisan websites. I found it telling that on the comment boards to those articles and columns, even many who defended President Obama made it a point to distinguish the circumstances of his speech from those that Hillary Clinton gave prior to her last presidential run. Many of these commenters openly acknowledged that yes, the Clinton speeches did look like a form of "pay-to-play" and an attempt to solicit expected government favors for money. <br/><br/>It may seem quaint to point this out given what's been going on with the Trump presidency. But it further reinforces the massive folly that the Democratic Party establishment undertook by putting all their chips behind Clinton last time, actively discouraging even Vice President Biden from running and clearing the field of anyone who they thought could seriously challenge her (not expecting Sanders to mount the challenge that he made). They are among those who helped saddle this country with President Trump.
Do we know that he didn't donate the money to his foundation? Is the foundation already set up to receive fees or is it still a work in progress? <br/><br/>The article quotes from something a spokesperson said that indicates that there will be times when Barack Obama will speak for free. Wouldn't this help balance the larger fees he might ask for? Besides, let's face it, Wall Street can well afford the out lay of $400k to hear a superb speaker and a man of character who just may have influenced them for the good. That in itself would make it justifiable.<br/><br/>Trump won't tell us what he does with, for, or about his money. Why should his predecessor?
Two things:<br/><br/>1. I see nothing wrong with taking the money and giving the speech. To continue his mission and fulfill his vision, President Obama will need both money and vibrant connections to the wealthy and powerful. It is a pollyannish conceit to think otherwise.<br/><br/>2, Unless they are from a compact and uniform state like Vermont, we force our politicians to continually raise BIG money in order to run and win. This means frequent exposure to the wealthy and the trappings of an elite lifestyle. We see time and time again, virtually without exception, that folks exposed to this lifestyle want it, and eventually come to believe they deserve and require it. The Obamas are not immune.
Every president except Jimmy Carter has done the same. I expected Obama who has been about public service to follow Carter's example. He is a multimillionaire already. Trump invited truck drivers and electricians in the White House. Prominent Democrats keep hobnobbing with Wall Street and Hollywood billionaires. That's not the way to nurture new Democratic leaders nor win elections.
Colin Powell is one of the most revered individuals in the country.  Ten years ago, he routinely accepted $100,000 for speeches with nary a comment.  Double standard again.  And, I'm sure that much of the Obamas earnings will go into charitable works.  Yes, it seems a little uncomfortable but compare it to other top level speakers and it won't seem out of line.  
I would hope that Obama would see to it that the speech is streamed live, or at least promptly afterward be made available for public consumption. If the bankers want to pay $400K to see the speech live and in person, so be it. Just don't have the world, especially the Republican world,  beating on Obama for years to "release the speech".
It's honest money at a price set by the marketplace. This is the nature of modern celebrity. No one -- or almost no one -- turns down a bag of money on those terms.<br/><br/>When a journalist who has turned down millions "on principle" criticizes Obama, I will listen.<br/><br/>You can't say Obama spent his time in office pandering to those who could make him wealthy later, which is what most congressmen do.
part of the issues with big banks offering ex presidents big money is -- the presidents really don't have anything to offer in terms of insight that might provide the firm some economic benefit.  Obama, Bush, Clinton -- on down the line -- none were from the world of finance nor were they particular experts.  What could they tell the finance gurus on wall street what the gurus don't already know?  Probably very little of economic value.  <br/><br/>So what is the $400k for?  A chance to rub shoulders with a former prez?  Or is it simply a gift gussied up as a reasonable financial exchange between two parties?  Or a payment for future consideration?  Whatever else Obama may be going forward, he will continue to be a key leader of the democratic party.  Might it not be a smart move for financial firms to line Obama's pockets with lots of spare change so he can bring to bear influence on his party and how it views wall street?  <br/><br/>Yes -- there is a fair economic transaction here -- but it isn't $$$ for insights on how to navigate global finance.  No, it is likely a simple exchange, money for future influence and favors.  
So, Jimmy Carter has not collected big speaking fees, instead building homes for the poor, writing quite a few excellent books, and teaching Sunday School at his little church. I love him for it all, but, guys, none of it has made him one iota more electable.
I think you are being a little harsh. I'll take the other side of this argument, why would anyone pay anybody hundreds of thousands of dollars for one speech.. really.  Any organization or corporation could take that money and use it for pay equity for women, health insurance for employees or higher pay for the lowest paid workers, but they don't... i don't blame Obama or anyone else for accepting such gigs but I do wonder why they are offered.
It certainly feels like a betrayal--no matter how anyone tries to rationalize it. Above all, it doesn't "LOOK" good. If Obama were going to speak to Wall Street without taking any fee (given that he doesn't apparently need the money) it would seem more in line with the authentic and altruistic vision of himself as a leader that he projected to all of us .
Let's lighten up. The man is not the Messiah and should be allowed to earn. If some organization wants to pay him $400K, good for him. It doesn't diminish him in my view.
We are only into the first 100 days of the Obama post-presidency and don't know what his ultimate legacy will be. I care less about the money he makes than I do about what he does with his time and treasure in the long run. Given the man's temperament and character; I look forward to finding out.
Oh, hush.  Isn't it more than a tad premature to accuse this extraordinary human and former public servant of a moral lapse of lapping up from the cash-filled trough of the super-wealthy?  Good heavens.  Can you not wait until you begin to get some idea about what it is that Mr. Obama will actually do with his life that the money will make possible?  Can we have any doubt whatsover that it will be something that will benefit others and contribute significantly to the public good?  All that he has demostrated in his life is that his moral and ethical core is well-formed with decency and goodness.  Let him be, please. You, we, have more urgent tasks to do.  That would be to protect our world from the uniformed and trigger-happy man that occupies the Oval Office.
President Obama was paid $400,000 per year as president.  I'll leave it to others to figure out his hourly compensation considering his days began before 6 am and ended past 11 pm or 12 midnight.  Not to mention the burden on his shoulders of being on call literally 24/7.<br/><br/>Even with a $65 million book deal waiting in the wings, why shouldn't he receive whatever the market will bear for his time in front of a group willing to pay to hear what he has to say?  Who are we to judge him?<br/><br/>Considering that we now have a man in the White House who has no shame in profiting from his time as president WHILE he is still in office, it makes Barack Obama look even more like a man who was - and still is - true to his values and vision.
More important than the fact that he delivered the speech for a considerable amount of money, I would like to know what he said.  Was the transcript released?<br/><br/>And unlike the current occupant of the White House, will he pay all relevant taxes on the income rather than taking or seeking an exemption; more details.
While I don't necessarily agree with President Obama's actions, I don't recall a similar opinion piece when either President Clinton or Hillary Clinton engaged in similar activities. One wonders why not.
Let's see how he invests his money before we rush to judgement.
This demand for purity is killing both political parties. He is a former President, not a current one. Let him have a private life and let him earn money as he sees fit. If you don't like it, vote 3rd party, vote for Trump or sit at home like all the other poor disillusioned souls.
Most people would like to live in a world where secret service protection weren't necessary for former Presidents and they behaved more like Jimmy Carter.  For all the failings of Carter he has been the greatest former POTUS.  Clearly, the Obamas have and are cashing in. Jimmy Carter is building 'habitat for humanity' and traveling the world observing elections that are hopefully fair.  Quite a contrast.
If President Obama values his reputation for propriety, he will publicly donate every dollar paid by corporations of any kind from anywhere to charities that he does not control, and make public the contents of those speeches.  <br/><br/>We expect better of him than the Clintons and Bushes.
He should have them donate the fee to a charity of his choice. Win all around! 
Gee, do we need keen insight to see the hypocrisy of the left? As Hillary soaked foreign donors, aka "investors" for her so-called charity? As our lad DeCaprio shows up in a G-5 jet at a recent rally to espouse saving the planet by using less fuel? It's not tone deaf. It's a deep seated belief that as an "elite", their actions are more than justified, because they are doing the far more important work of saving us rubes from ourselves. Being smarter than the rest of us, they have earned the right to pontificate, and we are to shut up and listen, if we "know what's good for us". What is good for us? What they say, of course.
These monies and notice that I did not call them a Speech or a Book. They do not look right for what the person, in this case Obama, is doing. Is $400k for a speech worth it, is $65M for a book that likely will not sell to cover print costs worth it? People are saying in comments it is his right, and under US law it is unless proven. I find it highly worrisome that the US economy collapse that happened during the end of the Bush Admin and start of Obama's first Admin, went nowhere in terms of legal identification of who was at fault.  Obama's Admin should have identified Wall Street players and globalists that lead this rape of America's money, then locked them up, but he seems to get a nice payoff in a 90 minute speech and a an upcoming book. It doesn’t matter the political party: Politicians are the same they sell out to the people the coat their hands with money. 
Well, President Obama's corruptibility certainly puts the pervasive disgustingness of our political culture in perspective.<br/><br/>I, personally, already resent his decision to remain publicly mum on the Trump campaign's collusion eith the Kremlin diring the 2016 election.<br/><br/>Presidrnt Obama's just a man, and is therefore fallible.
In Pres. John Kennedy's inaugural address, he said:<br/><br/>"Let us never NEGOTIATE out of fear, but let us never fear to NEGOTIATE."<br/>========================================================<br/><br/>I hope that Pres. Obama will focus on improving negotiations at all levels. Now, with lying Donald Trump, negotiations are breaking down on many levels. In government, we have polarization and threats. <br/><br/>But I think Pres. Obama is partly to blame for the break down. He talked down to people. He distanced himself, with the tele-prompter. He was often "no-drama" Obama. He distant himself from social media. People became bored with his aloofness.<br/><br/>Yes, perhaps he can use the zillions of dollars he can earn, to further real dialogue. As JFK said: "Let us begin..."
Revising President Obama's words and substituting "Democrats" yields:<br/><br/>"...Democrats spent more and more of their time above the fray, outside the world of immediate hunger, disappointment, fear, irrationality, and frequent hardship of … the people that they'd entered public life to serve.”<br/><br/>And IMHO, the media is equally complicit.  Again, modifying President Obama's words:<br/><br/>"... But the media reflected, almost uniformly, the perspectives of their class: the top 1 percent or so of the income scale.”
The former president is an individual citizen, free, at last, to enjoy the rewards of what the market will pay for his appearances and speeches.  
There are far more important lights to shine on political concerns. This ain't one of them.<br/>Let it go.
Seriously? Obama is an EX-President; he is not a future hopeful.<br/>Let's hear what he has to say in these forums.<br/>Is it thoughtful or is it pablum for the audience?<br/>Critique the thoughts and advise the process constructively.
Superb editorial.<br/><br/>BUT -- For the year of our last presidential contests, the New York Times fielded a political team of lightweight reporters and comfortable columnists representing the Insider Establishment within which they and especially their leaders sit.<br/><br/>They gave us a year of PR for the name and tweets of Trump, Blackout of Bernie, support of Ms. Hillary the Money-Insider Establishment Queen. That gave us choice of a Queen and Clown Prince Trump. Queen Hillary talked of doing things for The People, but what she represented was equivalent to the Queen standing on the balcony of the Establishment Castle tossing out larger crumbs to the Serfs out in the field below.<br/><br/>She had unique capability to lose to lose to Clown Prince Trump. And did.
Maybe we've jumped the gun here, until it is known what Obama will do with the money. It does make interesting reading, but will we get another editorial or column when he donates the money to his foundation? Yet another when he castigates Wall Street for its greed, gated mentality and lack of empathy for the rest of the world? I am betting on Obama to do the right thing (apologies to Spike).
I realize that a lot of people think of Barack Obama as Saint Barack, but in fact he is no longer a public servant, and unless there was some sort of a quid pro quo made with a corporation before he left office (and no one thinks there was), he should be able to take as much money as he wants.  <br/><br/>Fellow liberals, we are being diverted from the real problem, which is the huge sums of corporate money going into campaigns with the purpose of buying policy favorable to the corporation.  Keep your eye on the ball!
looks bad, eh?<br/><br/>let's wait to see what he says and what he does with the money.<br/><br/>this progressive, fooled twice (shame on him and me) by smooth talk, still hopes that the promising assistant professor who failed to deliver the goods that would earn promotion or tenure, can have a second act as an independent voice. 
"But why not elevate a new generation of political leaders and stay true to his values by giving his speech fees to his foundation and other charities focused on those goals?"<br/>__________<br/>And what world do the members of the editorial board live in?
Obama's hypocrisy speaks for itself. To read the twisted comments of those who would support this behavior is to see the demise of the Democratic party in action. Four hundred thousand dollars for an hour-long speech? How long does it take the 99% to make four hundred thousand dollars? After $65 million for the books? But then arugula is expensive.
When you are good you must be perfect.  When you are bad you can sometimes be good.<br/><br/>Obama deserves the opinion, but I don't agree.  I think he should cash out.  It's the American way!  One of the things I know I will not care about is how Trump cashes out when he leaves office.  But Trump is cashing out now - while in power.  <br/><br/>D's have no power so they need to shut up, leave Washington, and rally the local troops.  Stop talking and more action.  Organize marches, stop talking to talking-heads.  Stay in your districts, do the hard work. 
"...but it is disheartening that a man whose historic candidacy was premised on a moral examination of politics..."<br/><br/>Pretty pathetic to watch sycophants bend and twist to retain their idol worship.
"But why not elevate a new generation of political leaders and stay true to his values by giving his speech fees to his foundation and other charities focused on those goals?"<br/><br/>It doesn't work that way. MLK turned Machiavelli upside down when he explained the true sense of his moral revolution: "The means justify the end."<br/>You cannot longer use the old excuse that one must use manure to raise a healthy grove.<br/><br/>Obama saw how Hillary broke faith with her people and lose credibility due to the Goldman Sachs speeches (by the way, we never saw the transcripts) and she paid dearly for it. We voted for her but she never won over our hearts.<br/><br/>Obama must also have seen Sanders and the moral coherence of his stance. Did he really understand what that meant, particularly after the election? Probably not.<br/><br/>Matthew 6:24 ""No one can serve two masters. Either you will hate the one and love the other, or you will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and money."  Take it from an atheist (me).
The NYT eagerly &amp; repeatedly endorsed Hillary Clinton for president after she scooped up millions in speaking fees a few months before announcing her candidacy.  Maggie Haberman commented months earlier about Hillary's speaking fees "I don't see how she can run for president doing what she's doing." <br/><br/>What HRC was able to do was get the nomination and your endorsement.  What she couldn't do was win with that taint of corruption around her.  The NYT ignored the impression millions had that she sold access to her future presidency. This was a major reason that Trump (who was 1000x more corrupt) won the election.  The Democratic Party leadership currently remains in denial that anything about this kind of corruption is a problem for them &amp; are likely to repeat this mess ad nauseum.  Nancy Pelosi, when asked about this, idiotically proclaimed that billionaires needed to become "more empathetic."  She might as well be living on the moon. <br/><br/>How much does this even matter when a few billionaire families like the Kochs, Mercers and Murdochs own and determine our political discourse, even who can run for office &amp; what issues are covered?  <br/><br/>How could we take our country back from these billionaire moguls?  Most of us have no idea. The more we see of this, the more it makes us want to vomit.<br/><br/>The way out would be for Bernie Sanders &amp; candidates with similar values and policies to run.  The DNC, swimming in corruption, stepped on Bernie last time.  Remember NYT said nothing about that.
I admire Obama greatly, so I was terribly disappointed that Obama hopped on the money train so fast. In light of their extremely lucrative book deals, the Obamas have more than enough money to live beautifully for many generations to come. How much is enough? What is your dignity worth?  
I see it as compensation for having to survive 8 years of birtherism, obstructionism, and racism. I'm only sorry it's not coming out of Mitch McConnell's pocket. 
Everybody loves free enterprise until a Democrat makes a lot of money making a speech.
It's hard to blame him for taking the money: he's as entitled to speak, if not more so, than the Clintons and most/all of the other wise people and goofballs that probably occupy the speakers' circuit. But if there is one person in this country who does seem capable of recognizing that a higher standard exists, and that America could really use a person within reach of that ideal, it's Obama, and I don't fault the Times for asking more of him than we can ask of the Clintons. Plus I'd imagine that staying away from paid speeches to banks will be far more lucrative for his writing career than these chump-change one-off gigs.
I wonder how many on the editorial board would turn down large amounts of money for a speaking engagement "on principle". I'm sure that Mr. Obama realizes that money brings power. Let's give him the benefit of the doubt and see how he uses his new found wealth.
Why is this an issue? The Obamas worked hard on behalf of the American people during 8 years in office. During that time, they were not under fire for being ethically compromised. Now they are in the private sector. Perhaps they will give a portion of their money to charity, who knows?<br/>Let's focus on the holder of the current office, who is using it to feather his nest and that of his family and gives nothing to charity.
I'm confused by "Democrats are seen as more out of touch with ordinary Americans than the party’s political opponents." Does being "in touch" mean:<br/>1.promising solutions for which you have no possible clue<br/>2. insulting handicapped individual<br/>3. calling the military veterans who suffered interment by enemy forces as losers<br/>4. degrading women with language that even NFL players deny as being "locker room" talk<br/>5. Claiming his inauguration crowd was larger than Obama's and that Obama tapped his phone lines (outright lies) while turning to the media and calling them "fake news."<br/>6. befriending foreign leaders who regularly execute opponents and journalists<br/>7. Alienating our allies<br/>7. Changing the charges on China in the same week that Ivanka gets her trademarks OK'ed by China (Hmmmm).<br/>And I can go on! I truly fail to see what "ordinary Americans" are looking for. There are no quick and easy fixes for some policies that took decades to create (think Middle East, health care, global trade).
Quote from Barack Obama:  "I mean, I do think at a certain point you've made enough money."  I guess a $60 million book deal does not constitute "enough."  Arguably the most influential Democrat in the country is now the party's biggest hypocrite as well.
It seems petty to me to criticize Obama for taking $ 400.000 for his speech or for taking a certainly well-deserved vacation at a place where he can be on his own. After all we know about the Obamas, we can be sure that he will make good use of his fortune (as he already pledged on the occasion of their book deals). Given the shameless greed and self-enrichment going on in the White-House-turned-Trump-Casino, Obama's speech honorarium shouldn't wrinkle our mind a bit or take any minute off our watch on the Trumpians.
This $400K is part of the restitution that America owes one of our greatest Presidents. Given the 40K insults he took from the plutocrats/GOP/deplorables, that's $10/insult, a bargain for the haters, really.
President Obama spent the last eight years of his life in one of the most difficult jobs in the world for compensation that was a fraction of what the private sector pays for anything approaching a comparable burden.<br/><br/>He is never going to run for office again and there is no suggestion that his speaking fees represent a deferred quid pro quo for anything he did while President. I don't see any reason that he shouldn't take the opportunities that he now has to build some wealth and don't think any less of him for doing so.
Do you remember when Trump accused Hillary Clinton of corruption?<br/><br/>I do.<br/><br/>Until the people who support Trump and support Citizen's United change their tune, dumping on Democrats for LEGAL behavior (I'm looking at the Trump Hotel in DC and the leveraging of Ivanka for her patents and brand during her dinner with Xi as 2 tiny examples), nothing will change.<br/><br/>And now we have Gorsuch on the Supreme Court, which means we are stuck with the originalists intent of corporations being people for a long, long, long, long time.
Why is the NYT holding Obama to such a high standard? He signed on to be President of the United States, not Mother Theresa. And why shouldn't he hang out with celebrities if he enjoys their company? Unlike Trump he did not use his position when he was president to benefit himself. The editorial is expecting Obama to be a poster boy. But those who hated him before and voted for Trump as a reaction will continue to do so.<br/>The Republicans are more out of touch with with ordinary Americans but they have learned an important tactic. It is better to be on the offense than on the defense. 
Oh for heaven's sake.  I get what people are saying about optics, but this is ridiculous.  The man is a private citizen now, and he can make money in whatever legal means he wishes.  Barack Obama has been raked over the coals for a decade now; he's grown old in our service.  And now, he's going on the speech circuit, speaking to a firm that, as far as I can tell, is one of the good ones.<br/><br/>Yes, he commands a high price.  But of course he does.  He's a marvelous speaker as well as an ex-president, and I'm sure he'll continue to be in high demand.  But the pearl-clutchers on the Left have to moan about how "disheartening" it is to see him earning money commensurate to the value of his time.  <br/><br/>Who are you on the Editorial Board to decide how much money he should make as a private citizen?  Who are any of us to?  Maybe you should send him some guidelines so that President Obama knows how much he can make without it being called "perhaps not" a betrayal.  I assume you also sent a similar admonition to Bill Clinton when he started hitting the speech circuit?<br/><br/>Or just maybe, you should let the man alone on this.  I have no problem with Barack Obama making as much money as he cares to.  Given his service to me and the rest of the country, he's earned a pay-day.  
Did I miss the paragraph where The Times tells us how the Obamas plan to spend the money? You have to have money in order to give it away. Carter was wealthy before he ran for president. The Obamas, not so much. <br/><br/>$400K is a lot for a speech, but if someone would pay me that much I'd jump. To me it's not that Obama is taking the money, it's that Wall Street has that much to dole out just for a speech. <br/><br/>Let's give the Obamas some time. A chance to show their true path now that Barack has left the presidency. They certainly deserve a bit of patience from us.
Why is it not OK for a black Democratic private citizen to make what the market will bear when the same thing would be unquestioned for white Republicans?<br/><br/>President Obama should get a pass.  First, he's no longer in office, so there's no implication of a quid pro quo.  Secondly, not that it's my business what he does with his money, but it will give one progressive in the land the means to advocate for the less fortunate.  Thirdly, and I think this is very important, he will have parted the 0.1% from a chunk of their money.  I actually look on it as going towards reparations for the black community that has been systematically denied the opportunity to build assets.  
I had an interesting moment a week or so ago, when I looked up big fossil donors to politicians. Guess who were the only two democrats on the first page?<br/><br/>Bernie Sanders and Michael Bennet!  So wake up people, Bernie is just as capable of being expedient as the rest (he voted against gun control because he was representing his state which is pro-gun). These 2 Democrats are people I admire, and the amounts they took were dwarfed by Republicans. But facts are facts.<br/><br/>The scale is the problem. Congressional Republicans are on the take, in the millions verging on trillions. As long as we have this system, admit that noone in office is not taking money. That includes Bernie!
I greatly respect Barack Obama and believe that he brought a thoughtfulness and longer view of difficult issues to the office than most others in recent memory. I also understand that his talk is supposed to be at a health care conference. However, the symbolism and optics of choosing such a venue are baffling at this particular time unless it is purely a need for income. I don't know what his finances are. Still, I think speeches made at any number of different venues to substantially different audiences would have set a far better tone and made a sharper point at this time in our country. Neither party may be able to completely avoid including the concerns of Wall St companies in development of platforms for governance, but the question is one of priorities and what matters most. Wall St concerns are not what matters most right now Mr. Obama. Sending a proper message is.
A two-tiered system could be envisioned for encouraging both the base animal spirits motivation and the esoteric, better angels motivation in American public life. We all have them both, but some possess more of one than the other and whichever emphasis each of us has, it is important that we all recognize the legitimacy, validity and value of each kind of motivation. Both are part of the human condition everywhere on earth.<br/><br/>Most of us verbalize as though we are strictly and only motivated by the better angels. We want to be seen as high minded, but smart, the latter being dog whistle for animal spirit motivation. This idea is exactly what Trump supporters resent when they emphasize their disdain for political correctness, a profoundly felt sense of being brushed aside by the Democratic Party’s presented identification with the better angels crowd.<br/><br/>Why not modify the electoral system to gradually bring up appropriate civil servants into politics with a series of run-offs that separate the base aspect of raising money from beholden private hands and to pay Washington decision-makers so that this kind of talent receives the reward that their dedication and service deserves?<br/><br/>Washington could be the cathedral of democracy. Imagine it. The American people deserve a cathedral as much as they deserve a market as we grind on into the brave new world of the post-modern.
President Obama has every right to make money from speaking engagements, however I wish he did not in this instance.  Right now we have an administration that treats the White House as another marketing tool to promote his brand.  It would have been nice to see the President Obama set a better example and provide a stark  contrast to the money grab that is now taking place. It would help strengthen his message and have it's  influence resonate with a wider audience.
What I don't understand is why such a fee as a direct income source benefits him or his sponsors as much as a comparable contribution to his nonprofit foundation. He could always charge that foundation, but so many of his expenses might already be covered, why did he choose to stick his neck - or hand - out so far this early in his retirement? Were I he, I would have charged the Wall Street firm even more, but charged it through a foundation that could contribute to both his own expenses and his charities.,..
I don't think Mr. Obama being paid a high fee for speaking is a problem. Why are Republicans respected for making money and Democrats attacked? Wall Street is an important constituency in the USA. The success or failure of Wall Street affects not only the super wealthy but also the middle class and anyone with a job, pension or 401k. It is reasonable to expect Democrats and Republicans to work with and support Wall Street on some level. Democrats will never succeed by moving so far left they attack their most popular recent politician for earning money.  
President Obama was nothing but a source of pride for our country.  He pulled us out of the mindless mess that Bush created before him (and now even Bush is being paid to give speeches).  President Obama represented our country with dignity and high intelligence and left an impressive hard-fought legacy that Trump is tearing to shreds.  The Obama’s deserve to reap some kind of reward for their dignity, patience, and dedication to the American people.  I only hope that President Obama and Michele Obama are one hundred percent truthful and spare none of their obstructionists in their books.   What were the American people thinking when they voted for Trump?  Now we are all learning what it’s like to live at the flip side of the coin.
 "In a poll released last week, more than two-thirds of voters, including nearly half of Democrats themselves, said the Democratic Party is out of touch with the concerns of the American people. For the first time in memory, Democrats are seen as more out of touch with ordinary Americans than the party’s political opponents. There’s little doubt that Democratic leaders’ unseemly attachment to the party’s wealthiest donors contributed to that indictment."<br/><br/>So what did the American people, who vote for Republicans and Democrats, do about the corruption? Keep voting for the same opportunists, election after election.<br/><br/>When they educate themselves about government and the Constitution things will stop and they'll choose the right candidates, public servants. Americans seem to have lost the will to govern themselves; as long as they abnegate their rights by making bad choices as to whom to vote to represent them, they shouldn't complain about being exploited. <br/><br/>Money is a powerful lure and unless you shut off the light, the money moths will continue to be attracted to it.<br/><br/>Is President Obama taking food out of anyone's mouth by accepting the speech? Maybe he's exploiting the exploiters. Exploitation is what this country is all about. Give him a break.<br/><br/>Americans, you made your bed so stop complaining.
Michelle and Barrack's  memoirs solid for a report $ 65 million.<br/>There is no need for more money .     <br/><br/>Far more than a disappointment.   It sets the wrong tone  for the US - greed is good.<br/><br/>President Carter returned to Plains and taught again Sunday School.  For that I will eternally be grateful - He set a standard for the world to follow.
If Wall Street bankers want to pay President Obama $400,000 for a speech - why should he not accept it?  The outrage should not be about how he earns his money- as long as he earns it legally. Who knows - maybe in that speech he will be able to influence their thinking and begin to bridge the gap between the top 1% of the 1% and the rest of us? Ok - maybe that's a pipe dream.<br/>I do not believe he will abandon his values or his principles regarding equal rights for all - whatever means he chooses to fight for social justice and a fair and just world are his to decide and his to live with.<br/>Personally I'd rather the outrage be pointed at a sitting president who refuses to be open about his finances (aka - release your tax returns), is personally profiting from the office of the president, articulates no clear vision for his presidency (someone close to him - please tell him there is a difference between setting a vision and offering tactical details), and seems determined to squash free speech.  Personally  -  that's where my outrage lies.
Thanks for raising this concern.<br/><br/>We live in a weird communicative capitalist world, where fame is immediately convertible to cash. Such a world complicates the "representative" element of representative democracy. I'm no ascetic, but it is time to build a political movement that takes a stand against the legal corruption all around us. Perhaps this will issue help the Editorial Board belatedly see the importance of the Sanders coalition and the need to support it.
I hope Mr. Obama's post presidency will be similar to that of Jimmy Carter's -- humbly and quietly working for the good of all peoples, with no need  for the trappings of wealth. Carter is by far the most respected of all the former presidents. He also seems to be deeply happy and profoundly at peace with himself. He lives according to the Christian values of selflessness and sacrifice. Obama also espouses these Christian ideals, although not as overtly as Carter. The 2013 book "The President's Devotional" by his spiritual advisor offers an inspiring insight into his faith. While Obama is more outgoing and more worldly than Carter, he doesn't seem to need the limelight as much as Bill Clinton. We will have to wait to see how highly he values financial gain and a rich-and-famous lifestyle.<br/>I respected and admired Obama as president and will withhold judgement for now, since he tends to think strategically with long-term goals in mind. I do hope he does not aspire to join the 1%, since most in that group view the world through a prism that skews reality.<br/>If Mr. Obama hopes to rebuild the Democratic party, as he has said, he will need finances to support his work. He will also need the respect of the citizenry. Wealth per se does not guarantee that.
I'm not sure why a former president of either party should be exempted from making money.<br/><br/>Let's focus on where money and influence lies before and during tenure in office.
Obama was the greatest political disappointment of my lifetime, more disappointing even than Tony Blair. <br/><br/>Obama's many failures to deliver what he had promised, and his capitulation to the one per cent, helped pave the way to victory of the most absurd American leader in the country's federal history, this so-called President Trump.
And who is to say that President Obama will not be donating speaking fees to his library or, perhaps, to his foundation - if he establishes one.  I think it is a bit too early to tell what he will be doing with the money he earns going forward.  What  I will say, however, is that he has certainly earned every penny of his speaking fees.  Much admired and very much missed!
I would much prefer that Obama have that $400 K than whichever Wall Street firm he is being paid by. Perhaps he will be able to convince them of a few things. A portion of that money will go to pay taxes - more than what would under GOP policies, and some portion will free up Obama to give free speeches for organizations that can't afford to pay. I love that Jimmy Cater works for Habitat for Humanity, but people need to find their own best routes to help others - making connections with the wealthy is part of that &amp; they respect you more if they pay you than if you offer your thoughts for free. 
The monetary gain is not bothersome to me but what does is his admission to 1 percenting his office. Once again all capitalistic roads lead to a Rome of class based society. Since the ending of the Viet-Nam conflict the only President iv'e seen working steadily for the people has been Jimmy Carter who was thought of as a weak President. While i do like President Obama i always wondered if he still had an idea of the average person's life style. It is interesting that he talks of the Capitalist money makers taking over his sphere of influence starting with the campaign process. This brings to mind the "Ring" that destroyed our old friend "Gollum".<br/> I have heard tell that some of our Congress lament the days gone by when they all lived together and shared an existence that made it a more family type experience to deal with each other. We are in a perilous time where the chasm is ever deepening between parties and classes. We need to communicate and mix more; not isolate and separate. Mind The Gap!
Seriously?  There are gobs of athletes, entertainers, financial advisers, televangelists, and who knows who else who pull down fortunes for doing no more than what Obama did.  Then there are the corporatists who actively bribe members of Congress to rig the tax codes in a way that will allow them to make extra millions, let alone $400,000.  Heck, we even have a President who is proposing tax code fixes that will let him make many more millions yearly.<br/><br/>The last time I checked, former President Obama is a private citizen who while president was scrupulous in not enriching himself and his family.  So, let him have a few big paydays without criticizing him for not mirroring Ghandi or Mother Teresa.  
well, I think President Obama will be teaching and not speaking.  I am sure President Obama will  speaking about the successes during his 8 years as a great leader. Hopefully the elite learn something.  Please let them know, President Obama,  the 99% are "bigly" are part of the solution, [ not part of the problem, as Mr. DT is so happy to think] In my opinion the former President and First Lady left an incredible  mark on the office. It is only "sad" that he is not speaking to the current administration. 
"It is disheartening that a man whose historic candidacy was premised on a moral examination of politics now joins almost every modern president in cashing in."<br/>I agree. Thank you for stating this. 
Many individuals had such high hopes for Obama the two term president. In the end he is really nothing special. He surrounded himself with enablers and the 1% he purports to despise. At least Trump's motives are clear. No more apologizes for America and restoring our dominance on the world stage.
I can't understand your outrage. If that is the going rate for former Presidents, why should Obama give it for free.  Get over it,  Obama is not a  saint or ascetic, he's just a guy who has done spectacularly well and wants the fruits of  his arduous labor. That's the American way.  Don't use a double standard with him. He's got something  completely unique to say and GS wants to hear it. The price is peanuts for them and deductible. Its not a moral issue. 
This is a Non-Issue. He is doing that only after completion of Presidency. He will not seek any public office. He is a private person now. Hillary did not get elected because she did that even before occupying White House. Probably nobody will pay Hillary that amount of money for any kind of speaking engagement. I hear that Clinton Global Initiative laid off all workers. 
I think Obama was our best president, at least since FDR.  He presumably has plenty of money from his book deals.  He won't starve.  He doesn't need that $400K.  It will just hurt his legacy and the Democratic Party.  Speech money should go to charities that help desperate people.
It's baffling to me why people are upset about this speech. It's supply and demand. There are 45 people in history who have served as POTUS, who have lived that experienced.   That others are willing to spend what to them is an inconsequential amount of money to hear his views should not surprise anyone.  Save your moral outrage for the one who is making that same amount of money weekly off of his presidency.
According to the current occupant of the White House, everything bad that happens in the next four years is the direct result of something that his predecessor either did not do, or else a failed policy that must be corrected and reversed.  Therefore, if the response to speaking fees that almost-every-other-president-has-accepted after leaving office is an executive order prohibiting future presidents from receiving similar fees  . . . . we'll see how that works out.   
Why not address the elephant in the room directly? Paying 400K to an ex president, who has no power to influence anything now, looks an awful lot like deferred compensation for services rendered while in office. In other words a deferred bribe. it is a golden opportunity for a class act like President Obama to set a new paradigm in this unseemly business by refusing to participate it it. 
Stop dissing Obama!  He was a great president and we are all indebted to him.  He was the least corrupt president in recent history!  He is no longer in government and can charge whatever the traffic bears for his speeches!  Unlike some others, he is not selling influence.  Let the fellow enjoy his much needed retirement!
Yes, "jarring" is the word. I admire Barack Obama and supported him from start to finish, but this is doubly jarring.<br/><br/>At any time, it would ill become him to profit from the presidency to the tune of $400,000 a speech. Not only is it a saddening display of greed, but it also puts him in the position of an object up for sale. There's a difference between accepting an honorarium and putting oneself on the block.<br/><br/>Coming at this time, it's a descent from the high ground just when we need him to stand in sharp contrast to Donald Trump's club of the greedy. In the struggle that's going on now, you can't serve both democracy and Mammon.<br/><br/><a href="http://thefamilyproperty.blogspot.jp/" title="http://thefamilyproperty.blogspot.jp/" target="_blank">http://thefamilyproperty.blogspot.jp/</a>
Perhaps some of those who showed no respect for President Obama while president, now seeing that the money-men they seem to respect so much are willing to pay him what they themselves cannot imagine for even years of labor, might now grant him at least a little of the respect that he has long earned.
Mr. Obama shows his true colors. It seems has been even more egregious than other Presidents with the notable exception of Mr. Clinton. He has supped with the uber rich and decided he wants to become one of them. Values? What are those in comparison to the billions you can rake in? It seems Mr. Obama has finally found what he wants: money and privilege.
Of everyone in AND out of public life hawking their experiences in speech, President Barack Obama is one person I would have no problem paying a half million dollars to speak to my employees. He has great command of the language, but speaks like a human. He has something to say. Worth every penny, I would say. Unlike many others on the circuit. 
A faction of Americans are craving real moral leadership and Obama has come so close, so often.  It's not for me to say how he should conduct himself now that he's out of office, but saying no to that sum of money, just on principle, would have been totally awesome.  
What makes people immediately assume that Pres. Obama making a speech to 'Wall Street' is automatically considered as something nefarious?  Since his early political years he was outspoken in supporting the needs of regular citizens and as President advocated for fairness in banking policies...why would anyone think that he suddenly now would make a 180 degree turn in his thinking?  What did he actually say in his speech...that should be hus measure.  Does he now need to live a paupers life to remain acceptable...what hypocrites we are. 
Why does a guy who has multi-generational wealth off the book contract he signed (before taking into account his wife's book deal), need to take any paid speaking engagements? How many yachts can he water-ski behind?
Why shouldn't he accept that fee if that is what they were offering? I have no problem with it.
I just finished reading Marianne Williamson’s "The Law of Divine Compensation on Work, Money, and Miracles." I was inspired! Among the many treasures contained within, she writes: “As long as we’re making money righteously, we’re not only receiving a blessing but also extending one to others.” Ms. Williamson, who’s horrified by the economic hardships facing so many, encourages us, nonetheless, to examine our prejudices and conflicts toward money. We must learn to make peace with the fact that it’s O.K. to earn money, even a great deal of it, when there is an equitable exchange. When our work is of service to others and to the healing of the world, abundance is shared. <br/><br/>Ms. Williamson also rallies us to see our work as a calling versus a job: “Think of your work life not as separate from your spiritual life but as central to your spiritual life. Whatever your business, it is your ministry.” This becomes possible for every one of us if we can shift our perspective. As an often-cited legend goes, two stonemasons were hard at work. The first complained that he was engaged in a backbreaking, thankless task. The second exclaimed that he was building a cathedral! <br/><br/>I believe that the Obamas embody the sage principles that Ms. Williamson champions and, as a result, we can look forward to and take part in their demonstration of what I have come to call “conscious citizenship.” As my mother, another wise woman, always says: “You only get what you pay for.”
We're okay with an actor getting $10M for a movie role. We don't even blink when an athlete lands a $100M deal for four years. The country has now elected a venal, grasping billionaire as its leader.  But apparently a man who has worked his entire life to serve the public good deserves criticism for being paid to use his talents and considerable intellect to provide for his family's future. Stop snapping at his heels like ill-mannered dogs.
Sad fact is, you can't get far without money, that is, MONEY, in this world.  Especially the one we live in now, where 1% of the population hold 99% of the wealth, or something like that.<br/><br/>That said, wealth enables one to do good for others as well as purchase that fourth yacht or that fifth mansion.  <br/><br/>It is possible that the Obamas, having viewed the terrain from a very high elevation, have concluded that to do good, they must not only be good, but have plenty of power to purchase goods on behalf of others.  <br/><br/>A Quaker friend of mine did just that after her brother told her to stop working at a shelter and get herself down to Wall Street.  Which she did.  And she's now able to provide backing for plenty of people who a., need it and/or b., are running for office to change things.  My Wall Street friend got herself arrested for participating in a march not so long ago.  She bailed herself out along with her friends and went right back to work.  Her values haven't changed, just her bank account figures.<br/><br/>About the Obama's and their future plans, we shall see. 
Would Wall Street be paying Obama such huge fees if he had prosecuted and imprisoned just one CEO of a bank that helped crash the stock market in 2008? Previously, that forced the Bush Bailout and, soon after, the Obama Stimulus; three huge costs that we ordinary taxpayers are still shelling out for.
Get off your high horse, as far as I'm concerned, he stuck it to Wall Street. Even the good guys need money to fight the good fight.
nothing like undoing your 8 year message to help Republicans.   cash in Mr. President and keep the Republican wave moving.  Thanks.
The utter fascination our world has with great wealth is as ancient as human history itself.  The Midas Myth affirms that everything Midas touched turned to gold and he thought this was a marvelous thing! Then his beloved daughter turned to gold dust when he kissed her.  Was her death worth it, the trade-off?  <br/><br/><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X_-XSGcjIhM" title="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X_-XSGcjIhM" target="_blank">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X_-XSGcjIhM</a>
Another shining example of "do as I say, not as I do." President Obama, I guess you're actually no different than any of our other money-grubbing elected officials (exception being Bernie Sanders). No wonder our country is so polarized and coming apart at the seams. And we're now being led down the road to perdition by the ultimate grifter in chief. Will be ever have leaders who are genuinely committed to helping anyone but themselves? I doubt it. 
If we want to preserve our future, we are going to have to do some serious reflection about this hatred of money, any money. Right now, Democrats are attacking the people they need because money. Right now, that's not how the world is.<br/><br/>Too many progressives are willing to sell the store to the unrepentant greedsters because they ***hate*** anyone who makes a lot of money.<br/><br/>They are missing the point, that it is not the person taking the money but a system that has ballooned the going price for things like ex-president's speeches, CEO salaries, and such.<br/><br/>Unrepentant predators and their supporters, Congressional Republicans, Trump, the Kochtopus, Mercers, Anschutz and other billionaire takers, are not at all shy about using their money to make money now, and to hell with our planet and society.<br/><br/>As long as you focus on hating your allies who are working in reality to try to change the way it's done, just because they participate, you are guaranteeing that those without conscience will continue to take over.<br/><br/>I know it's complicated, but we are all human, and refusing to participate in things the way they are is mutually assured destruction.
I am not particularly bothered by the $400K speaking fee since I believe the Obamas  will inevitably be philanthropic with their charitable foundation.   This pales in comparison with the current administration that fills its family's and friend's pockets at every turn.    I am bothered and disturbed that any business can afford to pay a $400k speaking fee to anyone.
Simple:  Democrats are too afraid of losing their top donors, who think socially like Democrats but economically like Republicans, to ever consider the interests of those who can't afford this.  Working class or elite donor class, Democrats.  Choose your values carefully.
I don't begrudge Barack Obama a chance to enjoy the perks of retirement and his life experience, but it doesn't matter what I think. The shattered Democratic Party can not afford to appear tone deaf, especially in the wake of such devastating losses in 2016. In politics, perception is reality. Expect the difficult Bernie Sanders faction to become even more uncooperative.
Like Hillary, Obama doesn't realize that "Republican Lite" centrism is out for Democrats and other liberals.<br/><br/>In the past twenty-odd years, the GOP has shifted the political and moral spectrum so far to the right, that we need to shift it leftward to restore balance.
While I agree with much of the premise in the article, there is a sentence that completely negates the authenticity of the argument. The editor stated " There’s little doubt that Democratic leaders’ unseemly attachment to the party’s wealthiest donors contributed to that indictment." The "Democratic attachment" is minute compared to the influence of big money on the Republican party. One only has to take a look at the Trump cabinet to understand that.
I can't understand the problem with Pres. Obama accepting a $400K offer. Is he supposed to say "Great, I'll do the speech, but for $125K" (or maybe you want him to ascend to the right hand of God and do the speech for free).  This is America. Who asks for less money to do a job. 
I find the expectation of Mr. Obama to be different than all others before him - even better than all others before him- seems normal after his 8 exemplary years as the President of our country.  U.S. lacked ethical and moral leadership at his position when he told office and President Trump has lowered the standards back to what was before, if not lower.  Should Obama accept austerity and leave out rest of his life as a saint, I still don't think he would ever be granted saint hood.  Obama will never be a role model for some and he will continue to be a polarizing figure despite being a good person, good father and a good Christian.  We are seeing plenty evidence that Christian values are not even present amongst our conservative politicians.   Shouldn't that be a bigger concern?
Great article. President Obama's moral obligation is to renounce the material world and fight the good fight from a position of weakness and poverty. 
There is something tawdry about a former president cashing in with book deals, big money speeches  -- as well as making money off books they have written prior to coming to office, or books family members write.  We should probably up the presidential pay check as well as the retirement package.  <br/><br/>But the problem with an Obama accepting big money from wall street is that it does bring into question the values he proclaimed as a president (just as it would if Bernie Sanders had been elected on his socialist platform and then as soon as possible started taking money from financial firms).  But more important, his spouse isn't out of the political picture, just like HRC wasn't out of the political picture when Bill left office.  Setting up foundations, accepting huge speaking fees sets up temptation if the spouse is politically active.  <br/><br/>It's hard not to argue that HRC and Bill were playing at least close to the ethical edge when she was SofS.  Fortunately, she was an unappealing candidate and her ethical lapses only made her less attractive.  Michelle Obama, on the other hand, could be a very attractive political figure.  Therefore it would be wise for the Obama's to avoid any taint of being beholden to special interests.  
I hope President Obama reads this. However, he should not be singularly blamed for trying to enrich himself. <br/><br/>This seems to be nature of Capitalism that has always been practiced in this country. I have observed a high level of honesty and a sense of principles among the hard working ordinary citizens of this country.<br/><br/>At the same time among the rich, the powerful and those who are in politics  and supposed to lead us and set examples for the rest, a level of greed, lack of principle, honesty and forthrightness that is very unfortunate.
Mr. Obama lived in my university neighborhood in Chicago before he became a Senator. It is a neighborhood that is racially and socioeconomically diverse. Walking down the street for 2 blocks, you are likely to see people of many races, to bump into both a millionaire and a homeless person.  Mr. Obama was a part of that community of outdoor art fairs and a large, great, private university with a large endowment, but also of soup kitchens and panhandling. He was no billionaire, but instead a teacher of Constitutional Law and a former community organizer, aiming to help some of the neediest and helping students to understand why America is truly great. I never knew him personally, but I shared the same environment for more than a decade with him. While I respect his dignity and eloquence, and I share his stated views on many subjects revealed in speeches between 2004 and 2016, I do sometimes wonder whether he feels the like the same person he was.  Has the Presidency changed his values? Does he remember the little guy?  I think he does. I think that he will do a lot of good.  I do not hold this speech against him. 
Obama is a private citizen with no power whatsoever in the government now or in the future. As a globally recognized thinker, he was paid by his audience for his opinion and for the right to hear him express it. It's his right and his business. <br/><br/>The tendency to conflate wealth and the capitalist engine that creates it with corruption will always limit the influence of liberals. Our cultural and economic influence and unassailable military defenses all stem directly from that engine. The standard of living enjoyed by most in this country, at both ends of the financial spectrum, is due to that engine. <br/><br/>Rather than disapproving of wealth as a concept, we should focus on a meritocratic distribution of the wealth we have.  Obama’s opinion has merit, and I have no problem with his being compensated by people who want to hear it.<br/><br/>I’s rather focus on the corruption committed now by people in official positions, staring with the president.
The man deserves to be paid what he is worth, and I see zero conflict between being well paid and caring about our society. I'm glad he is talking to these 1% ers or managers of the 1%. If the wealthy in this country don't care about anything besides living in an enclave, we have a huge problem. Don't fool yourself, the Obama's will be giving plenty of valuable, priceless speeches and time to the other 99%. These well paid opportunities do not go on forever. He is building a legacy of wealth which will empower his family and his foundation to carry on his vision into the future. He is one brilliant man, possibly the most brilliant political mind alive. I aplaud him at every step. He is just laying the ground for his next chapter. I think he will surprise us all.
The issue is not what he is paid. The issue is whether the public ever gets to hear what he says. That, and not that she made them, was the issue with Hillary Clinton's speeches. We will have to see, but I doubt Obama will make the same mistake of hiding what he says or saying what must be kept hidden.<br/><br/>Wall Street and other elites could stand a few lectures on the responsibilities of privilege in a democracy. And it is fine that they pay for them to understand, in the only way they can, that those lectures are addressed to them. <br/><br/>Any reader of the political thought of the "Founders" understands how keenly they were aware that the long-term viability of democratic forms of government depended upon elites awakened and attendant to needs other than their own, to those of the populace. That, and not a paean to rebellion, is the subject of Jefferson's famous "Tree of Liberty" letter: "What country can preserve its liberties if their rulers are not warned from time to time that their people preserve the spirit of resistance." The global crisis of Western values is largely attributable to elites who have too much and too long taken for granted the welfare of the peoples upon whose existence and labor their wealth and power depends. If Obama can say anything to set them straight, it's a good thing.
President Obama is out of office. Certainly he is influential, and still has access. But he does not have his hands directly on the levers of policy or government funding. Heck, he had little enough of those while he was in office.<br/><br/>President Obama has long since joined the one percent. And since those are the people that President Obama has to be influential with for his post-Presidency, I'd rather, if for no other reason than for identification and comfort, he maintain a "when in Rome" approach.<br/><br/>President Obama did nothing to dishonor himself while in office. He does nothing to dishonor himself now. In fact, having demonstrated himself to be a man of honor and commitment, President Obama is exactly the kind of person I'd like to see become extremely rich. He's exactly the kind of person who will know what to do with wealth and influence.
I have to say that I am conflicted regarding President Obama and his willingness to collect almost half a million dollars for a speech from Wall Street. I question though, my right to judge him for it. The expectation that he still be the standard bearer for the Dem's seems unfair. His terms as President were served with honor and dignity and with the expectation that he meet a very high standard. He did so with humility and grace well beyond the ability of our current President. If we had a truly strong and visible new leader, I do not see this as being as much of an issue. We would be focused on the new standard bearer and leaving President Obama to his personal life, as it should be. This man has never been allowed to falter and where it counted in 99% of situations, he did not. Anyone who says differently is being disingenuous in my opinion.The current office holder and his family are not waiting to go back to their private lives, they are taking full advantage while in office. Shouldn't we be holding 45 to the same standard? I only wish well for President Obama and am thankful for his service. I have yet to see 45 even begin to be anywhere nar President Obama's service while in office and I don't expect to see it, ever. We need a new leader, President Obama served us well and should be left alone. 
Comparisons to other presidents don't matter. It's just WRONG for ex-presidents to cash in on their reputations. It demeans our                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         highest office and it demeans all of us. It sets a cultural example that limitless greed is okay. And it leads office holders to understand that there is a pot of gold at the end of the "government service" rainbow -- with corrupting possibilities  hard to pin down but large enough to cause great concern. Finally it's unseemly -- just piggy that $65 million isn't enough of a reward for 8 years in a very privileged office.    
Hard to see how this speech promotes Mr. Obama's announced project of helping rebuild the Democratic Party base. Smells more like "teen hypocrisy," here.<br/><br/>Goldman Sacks doesn't seem to have had a problem having its position "heard" in the White House, but the Dems who crossed over to vote for Trump certainly did.
   By far, the better investment for former President Obama is the high road of no fees for speaking. Long after he has forgotten the silver, he will remember his illustrious legacy and understand that for many, his words were priceless.<br/>   The "free" speeches will also guide him to loftier podiums.<br/>   Between his pension and book royalties, he'll do well enough especially with the accompanyimg moral mantle.
Watch Trevor Noah's response to criticism of Obama for taking fees for speeches.  I'm with Trevor.  I'd rather he takes money from the wealthy than Trump taking money from the workers and people of the U.S.<br/><br/>As to the Democrats being "tone deaf" to working people, what other party supports public programs like healthcare, increased minimum wages, defending our environment and on and on.  The alienated non-working white people somehow expect miracles and drank the cool-aid of the Republicans and Trump.  Their introduction to reality seems likely to destroy our country.
I'll echo Trevor Noah's sentiment by saying: Why should Obama be the first President to give back the money? Trump doesn't even have the courtesy to wait until he's out of office before making a profit on his White House gig. Go for broke Obama. Time to cash in.<br/><br/>What would be more respectful though is returning the approximately $200,000 a year pension he receives from taxpayers. If you're making $65 million on a book and $400,000 on a speech, you don't need my money. Good on Carter for staying well away from these opposing interests.
It's not the money; it's what he does with it that counts. Will this be spent on luxuries for his family or will it be used to fund a worthy cause? If he is taking $400,000 from the undeserving rich in order to use it to help those who deserve help, then more power to him. And keep talking.
I have no patience with those (including Elizabeth Warren) who berate Barack Obama for taking money to speak in public. Whether or not you agree with everything he ever said or did, the man worked his fingers to the bone for 8 years with grace, honesty, intelligence, humanity, and a sense of humor, despite unprecedented opposition, and in the end was rewarded by seeing the worst possible candidate for President EVER, whose explicit aim has always been to tear down everything he had accomplished, succeed him. He should be able to speak for a standard corporate fee (and 400K is not unusual in this context) without being dragged over the coals for it. <br/><br/>Why, it's almost as if his critics are saying that the first African-American President should also be the first former President to forego any financial reward for his years of service in office. 
"Since Gerald Ford enriched himself with speaking fees and board memberships after leaving office, every former president but Jimmy Carter has supped often at the corporate table."<br/><br/>This raises an interesting point about President Carter. His presidency is universally regarded as a failure. Yet by all accounts, in terms of personal morality, integrity and putting his beliefs into action (his work for Habitat for Humanity, among other examples), he towers over every other president of at least modern times. Was it these very traits that compromised his ability to achieve better results while in the White House? It's a matter of public record that key Congressional Democrats of that era regarded him as a naïve pushover. Was he simply lacking in the necessary amount of toughness, menace, whatever one might call it that is required to push through one's agenda? <br/><br/>His presidency was right before my time; I'd really be interested in feedback on this. Thanks.
The issue is not how much money Obama gets from those who can afford to pay for his speech.  Although one would certainly hope the he does something more  worthwhile with his new wealth than simply enrich himself.<br/><br/>This bigger issue whether or not he is only available to those who pay such high fees.  Will he speak for free at fundraisers for groups whose activities he supports?  Will he charge for a commencement address?  Will he charge more modest fees to speak to campus groups?
In the same vein as paying $1,000,000 for a private performance from a super-star, is paying $400,000 for what is essentially a brief "consult" really getting one's money's worth?<br/><br/>People throwing around obscene amounts of mpney don't really know the value of a dollar.
The question is why Wall Street can pay such sums for speakers' fees. And what about the content of President Obama's speech might be. Focussing completely on the event is a missed opportunity for the editorial board. And why begin and end with Obama's speech? What about Citizens United? 
Wow.  Here we see a straight-up public transaction between private entities who presently have no public obligations, and we are meant to see something untoward in it, while we have a White House absolutely swimming in conflicts of interest?  Democratic policies have always been more in the interests of common Americans.  This is an excessive preoccupation with appearances.
Most of these comments seem to support Obama's decision to accept high fees, as do I. The suggestion that he turn over all fees to his foundation or to charities is bizarre. His life is not about acquiring wealth or buying Michelle million dollar diamond rings. If they end up with 5 houses in beautiful locations, good for them! I did hear that he will use some of the money to support electoral college (districts?) reform. if he's not going to get corporate backing (that may want something in return), he needs other funding. As others have said, I trust Obama to do the right thing, use his significant talent and expertise for the benefit of our world. I am so grateful for the Obamas and wish them well &amp; wealth!
President Obama is accepting what the free market will bear, and that is sound economic policy.  He did not profiteer while in the White House, which is sound moral policy.    However, I suggest that future NYT editorials give a fair shake to other past and future past presidents when they make similar decisions to accept large monetary gains post-presidency.  
I suppose President Obama took $400,000 because he simply couldn't convince the Wall Street guys to pay him the sum of $40,000?  <br/><br/>This ghastly development is proof (as if more was needed) that the One Percent have won.  The only hope the rest of us have is that the American oligarchs will realize that if they abuse and neglect the 99 percent too much, we won't have enough money to feed the hyper consumerist machine that keeps them in private jets and a luxe lifestyle that would have made 18th century aristocrats blush.
I agree with other writers, in saying that there is nothing wrong with our leaders earning money.  Having said that, there should be no confusion as to what this is about.  These companies are saying "Thank you" for favors done in the case of past leaders, or putting in a down payment for future favors in the case of people who are thinking of running, such as Hillary Clinton.<br/><br/>No one pays $400,000 for a speech without expecting some return on their investment.  It is no coincidence that Wall Street companies who pay these large fees, are lightly regulated and when they do mess up, their officers may be fined, but no one goes to jail.  <br/><br/>Of course there is no quid pro quo here, wink, wink, nod, nod.  I'm shocked!  Shocked I tell you, that you would even think such a thing!
OBAMA Is well within his rights to earn high fees.  What remains to be seen, however, is how he will engage in philanthropic activities.  The Clintons have done much good work through their Foundation.  I suspect the Obamas could very well do the same.  I do not find it unseemly for a president to use his time after serving to engage in widespread philanthropic activities.  He does not become like the 1% automatically if he has a structured plan to do good works.  Jimmy Carter, I'm sure, would welcome a "partner" in his Habitat for Humanity and his organization to promote world peace.  I suspect that he donates whatever fees he gets to his charitable organizations. And uses just what he needs to live.  While Carter is in the 1%, his attitudes and actions are NOT.
Read Today's report by Greg Sargent in the Plum Line Blog in the Washington Post.  Sargent reports on focus groups and polling conducted among blue collar whites who voted for Obama in 2012 and either voted for Trump or did not vote in 2016. Of those who switched from Obama to Trump 42% thought Democrats favored the wealthy.  Only 21% thought the same about Trump.  Obama's $400,000 fee is not going to help bring those voters back.  
It's much too easy to mount the high horse of morality when you are not the one receiving $400k offers to give a speech, and I guess I missed the part where the Obama's were required to take a vow of poverty after they left the White House.<br/><br/>I'm sure that money will be put to better use by the Obama's via deployment as charitable gifts than sitting in an account of a Wall Street.<br/><br/>I'm happy for them, not jealous or worried about what "message" that sends to everybody else. If that's what's keeping you up at night, the next four years are not looking very promising for your sleep patterns.<br/><br/>Good for them.
President Obama is completely entitled to buckrake after his presidency, so long as he doesn't repeat the Hillary Clinton mistake of trying to re-enter politics after he does so. Nevertheless, for all his intelligence, articulate speech, humor and experience, he has handed the Trumpers a coup.<br/><br/>Trump and his followers are masters of the facile put down that somehow sticks like glue. Hillary could never shake the "crooked" moniker and her legalistic explanations for her email server and the Clinton Foundation only made things worse. Similarly, just the other day Trump dusted off the "Pocahontas" moniker for Senator Warren and, you know what, ignorant as it is, it still smarts and will stick to her throughout any campaign for president.<br/><br/>I cringe when I think of what Trump will come up with for Obama now. I am sure it will be a masterpiece and aimed not only at President Obama, but liberals and the entire Democratic party.
Come September, let's get the transcript, then judge. He knows how to speak to this sector; how do we know he doesn't intend to nudge his listeners to help make the Affordable Care Act work better, or to propose a solution to discourage hospital greed, or for Wall St. pressure government lay off Obamacare once and for all. The greater good sometimes requires a silver tongue.
How do you know he won't give those fees to his foundation?  And why is everything that Republicans do from cheating on spouses to taking big fees to becoming millionaires while serving in Congress OK while it is an unforgivable  sin for Democrats?  I would like to see the same standards applied to both sides.  In the meantime we have a Republican President who cheated on his wives, stiffed contractors who worked for him, put his name on a fraudulent "university,"  lies continually, brags constantly and wants to change libel laws so he can't be criticized for any of his behavior!
'would be great he have all to Planned Parenthood, but it would be insignificant with the cutbacks that are in process.
There's nothing wrong with Obama accepting big Wall Street money post-presidency. The problem is with the delusional American voter who continues to believe that there will come a time when Wall Street money will have no influence in American politics. 
Why is anyone surprised? Obama was one of the most corrupt politicians that we have ever had, but in the trend of his predecessors. He's no different as all the rest. Though clearly from the commens here those that live in dimension B will venerate him as a saint forever, no matter what he does or did, and continue to heap hatred towards Trump, no matter what he does.
I have no problem with the Obama's book deals--that's fairly earned.  I do wish that they would contribute high fees for speeches to worthy causes ranging from Planned Parenthood to the Democratic Party.<br/>  Andrew Biemiller
The tone of this editorial seems regrettably patronizing and mean-spirited.  It's perfectly natural for all kinds of groups and organizations to want to draw upon the wisdom of Pres. Obama.  Is the writer suggesting that THIS President should decline the typical speaking fees offered by Wall Street?<br/><br/>How is it a betrayal for Mr. Obama to speak to Wall Street for the usual speaking fee?  What kind of upside-down logic requires him to take less than other high profile speakers?How would you expect his agents to deal with the request?  Should they say "well, our former President spoke for the the poor, the under-employed, the elderly, and the untreated sick, so he doesn't want your normal speaking fee"?  How ridiculous!<br/><br/>Dare I say this editorial sounds more conservative than liberal.
President Obama served the country well for 8 years in a very challenging job. He and his family had many opportunities but also had to sacrifice living a more normal life during their years of service. I don't mind seeing the smiling photos of the Obamas relaxing in the tropics with much needed time away from the stresses of Washington and politics. I will admit, however, to feeling queasy when I read about his payment for speaking. Perhaps I idolized him too much and forgot how much money is integrated with American politics at all levels.<br/>In a country where many children go hungry, lack health care, attend sub-standard schools, and face a melting planet no one should pay another human being thousands of dollars to speak. We all need to work harder as a people to address the inequity in our country. More money should go toward dealing with real problems in our society. If I thought listening to a speech from Obama would wake up Wall Street and lead them toward a more positive role then I would feel happier about his payment. 
I could see this being an Op Ed column, but seriously, from the Big Mama Editorial Board itself? You really think Obama accepting $400,000 for a speech on Wall Street warrants a whole column? As if it's some kind of soft corruption that's on a par with the daily, overt exploitation of the presidency for private gain on the part of Trump and his extended family that you're leaving to Op Ed writers to discuss?<br/><br/>Obama is never running for public office again. We can disagree with his personal choices on an array of things. I'm sure there are many progressives who want him to be more like Jimmy Carter, and go off to build houses for the poor. Perhaps they can take comfort in the fact that unlike the truly rich in this country, Obama will actually pay income tax on his speech earnings. Whatever, none of this is worth an editorial any more than where he vacations or with whom he chooses to have dinner.<br/><br/>As someone said on Twitter, Obama led the world for eight years without scandal and with daily death threats. Four hundred thousand per speech isn't enough.<br/><br/>Leave him alone.<br/><br/>As someone I saw on Twitter commented, "Obama led the world for eight years without scandal and with daily death threats. As far as I'm concerned, $400k per speech isn't enough"
This is an issue where I find myself torn within.<br/><br/>To my bafflement Jennifer Palmieri, the communications director of the 2016 Clinton campaign, joined a comment section this year to defend the need of paid speeches and networking / fundraising with Big Donors, arguing it's the only way you can get a campaign the necessary finances, as if there'd been no Sanders at all, proving it can be done.<br/><br/>On the other hand, I'm sensitive to the prosperity gospel, inasmuch that I would readily allow the bestowal of riches on myself, so why contest others that reality?<br/><br/>Well, because public service is about the prosperity gospel for all, not just for the 1%, and we all know the denial that money buys influence stinks.<br/><br/>Yet, there's something wrong, if in a line of people, it's the first black guy and woman to show up from whom we collectively expect to stay away from money and become the First Holy Abstinence Monks since Truman.<br/><br/>In fact, we did extend Obama a lot of credit and patience, exactly because of this sensitivity. And it's been Hillary's bad luck that we ran out of patience with the bad practice 8 darn years of deep 99% depression after the financial fraudpocalypse in the wake of the GOP supermajority freewheeling greed hubris era.<br/><br/>In 2013 in Germany the SPD lost big, after voters said yikes to the lavishly paid speeches of its frontrunner. The DNC and the NYT who came out pro Hillary early regardless should have simply heeded that conspicuously available electoral lesson.
"it is disheartening that a man whose historic candidacy was premised on a moral examination of politics now joins almost every modern president in cashing in..."<br/><br/>Not to me it isn't. And, I daresay, not to most Black people. We'd be disheartened if he didn't.<br/><br/>I don't believe Wall Street is evil. It's the engine that keeps our to economy running. It just needs to be tuned to provide greater benefit to the ordinary citizen. <br/><br/>And, really, is this more of the same "black man has to be better than white man" narrative? He's a man who gave up his life for eight years--getting shown a lot of hate for the good he was trying to do--so now he's getting paid to tell of his experience. Why is this disheartening to anyone?
I disagree, quickly desiring to explain my reasoning.<br/><br/>The Obamas are morally obligated not to cash-in (?).<br/><br/>I am cynical, yes, and this truly great newspaper is not, yes.<br/><br/>Because a  "relative false poverty" image is by definition fake. <br/><br/>The  FORMER POTUS does not lead nor inspire nor  fool when deliberately not cashing-in.<br/><br/>He'll hopefully be the first to acknowledge $400K for a speech is seemingly absurd.<br/><br/>The Clintons did apparently offend enough Americans to lose that  vote, because seemingly they couldn't perhaps humorously acknowledge absurdity of the phenomenon.<br/><br/>Well that's my convoluted take, and I'll stick with it until I don't.
Why shouldn't he make some money...be worked very hard for this country for eight years.  What do people want of him...to be a saint?
The people on Wall Street have a heart after all.  They are grateful that no one was prosecuted for the biggest frauds of all time, that the giant banks were not broken up, that their bonuses continued to be paid during the bailout.    Obama made it happen and now he is getting his reward.  A mega book deal, speaking fees, his own foundation - can a partnership in a hedge fund or private equity firm be far behind?
Barack Obama is simply showing us who he really is, and some of us had suspected it all along.  <br/><br/>What causes a bad smell is the possibility of a quid pro quo, which would explain why the Obama Justice Department never even attempted to prosecute the Wall Streeters whose now well-documented criminal acts helped bring down the economy in 2008.  <br/><br/>I don't really care what he does, as long as he stays away from the Democratic Party.  They need to shed his mantle, along with that of the Clintons, moving forward.
How do you know he's not donating that $400,000 fee to his foundation? However, apart from the sanctimony, here's another view of the value of that fee: the income tax it generates and what that pays for.<br/><a href="http://www.marketwatch.com/story/thanks-obama-how-his-400000-speaking-fee-actually-helps-america-2017-04-30" title="http://www.marketwatch.com/story/thanks-obama-how-his-400000-speaking-fee-actually-helps-america-2017-04-30" target="_blank">http://www.marketwatch.com/story/thanks-obama-how-his-400000-speaking-fe...</a>
It is still not too late for President Obama to state the obvious: "C'mon guys. I'm looking at two college tuitions. I gotta do this."
OMG who cares? I mean really WHO THE HECK CARES ABOUT THIS? I put this in the same category as finding out about movie 'opening weekends' - why should we care? Does this affect my life in any way? It does not. This is what the market is willing to pay for the man who just spent 8 years leading the free world. Good for him. Good for Reagan when he made $1 million.  Honestly - can we adjust our priorities please? 
Sad to see how he seems to have become one of "them".<br/><br/>How much  money does he really need?
I suppose Obama should forego paid speeches and book deals, or donate all proceeds to under-privilaged; then we could all feel good about how altruistic he is (as if dedicating eight years of his life to improving this country wasn't enough?). <br/><br/>Why don't you ask the same of Trump and his cabinet, the barons of Wall Street and Silicon Valley? Clinton or Bush?  Why single out Obama? <br/><br/>Obama has served his country. What he does now is none of our business. 
NYT Editorial " Since Gerald Ford enriched himself with speaking fees and board memberships after leaving office, every former president but Jimmy Carter has supped often at the corporate table. "<br/><br/>I want to take stock with the NYT Editorial board on that issue. <br/><br/>We all know the age of political innocence is long gone in American politics.  In the world of politics, there was never such thing as the first best. <br/><br/>America is one of the few countries in the world in which presidents cash in AFTER they leave office. In other parts of the world -- including many advanced countries e.g., Italy of Silvio Berlusconi -- becoming president is the optimal time to make a killing financially.   <br/><br/>Who knows? perhaps, real estate tycoon turned president Donald Trump will be the first American president to cash in DURING his period in office. Unthinkable $ 60 million be paid for an updated version of The Art of the Deal.  
The ongoing public discussion (and fresh opportunity to go after) President Obama regarding the high speaking fees he now has access to assumes the worse about him and attempts to place him in the category of the money-grubbing. How do you know that he isn't going to take advantage of this extraordinary opportunity to support his foundation and any other projects he sees as important to this country for which he still has hope. And he and his wife have the right to secure the future for themselves and their children. 
You paint him with a brush of shame even before he's made the speech. What if he breaks new ground and convinces the silent rulers of America to do good, in the Jeffersonian sense?
The Obamas have a right to earn as much as they legally can.  Those of us who admire the Obamas and aupported him for 8 years have the right to voice their opinion on how he chooses to do so.  <br/><br/>I find it disheartening that he has so completely been co-opted by the mega-yachts and the celebrity lifestyle.  Barack is a brilliant man, with all the experience and connections he needs to earn more money than he could ever have imagined mking.  But speaking to Wall Street is not earning money.  It's a sellout,  a repugnant and grotesque distortion of the values he stood for, and worse it's  a hugely hypocritical act from a man that many of us hoped would symbolize the continuing contrast with greedy and heartless Trump Republicans.  Mr Obama, take it from people who love you, don't do this.
Seems audacity promises more than hope.
Let's not put the cart before the horse. All we know is that reportedly he will be getting $400,000 for his debut speech to Wall Street. And we don't really know what he will be doing with that money. Let's give him the benefit of the doubt. As the President, he has been under great scrutiny and hounded out. He has been held to unbelievable high standards than any President before him. As a private citizen he is again under scrutiny. He and his wife have been offered a twin book deal of $65 million for books that have not been written. Obviously many people are very interested in their prose and what they have to say. So let's not put Obama and his Family under the microscope again!
Of course making these speeches also gives Obama way to communicate with the audience and maybe tell them things that they need to know. 
isn't this one reason so many disillusioned Democrats fell so hard for Bernie?  I hope Mr.Obama reads the comments expressed here and takes them to heart 
Knock it off, NY Times, and Bravo to our recently retired US President.    Barack Obama is:<br/>1) A good public speaker,<br/>2) Entitled to retroactive combat pay for all the disrespect he swallowed without comment for 8 years as President, and<br/>3) Entitled to a Cheshire cat smile upon seeing the market for his first speech as past President commands a price greater than that paid before to any past US President or First Lady, and<br/>4) He has 2 children to put through college.<br/>Former President Obama also distinguishes himself from the current President because he has not and is not defrauding anyone for lucre.   I think he's earned every penny.  
President Obama and his family were the most dignified and graceful occupants of the White House during my 61 years. <br/><br/>But I agree that his $400,000 speaking fee demonstrates an atypical tone deafness for this good man. He doesn't need the money. And the huge payment suggests "deferred compensation," as another commenter wrote. <br/><br/>The idea that the editorial board is criticizing this because President Obama is black is absurd. Contrary to what a few writers stated, the article DOES mention the downfall of Hillary Clinton due to the same greedy mistake. The article also mentions that this unseemly practice began with Gerald Ford who, last time I checked, was a white male.<br/><br/>Have we forgotten how little the typical American family earns in a year? $400,000 for one hour's work is the equivalent of nearly 10 years' pay for a typical American household. <br/><br/>President Obama has the opportunity to cement his legacy as a genteel, honorable man of integrity. My hope is that he will not besmirch his own reputation with this money-grabbing mistake.
The criticism of Barack Obama's fee for speeches is totally unwarranted in my opinion. For 8 years I heard nothing but insults thrown at the Obama's. Some of the worst Racial comments in words and charactues . Just disgraceful. Birtherism by the current President (so called). And the charge that he was the "most ignorant President ever" that's right by the same current President that thinks he bombed Iraq and the most important part of a meeting with the President of China was the chocolate cake. On top of Demint yelling "liar" in the middle of a State of the Nation. Mitch McConnel's famous remarks about his primary objective was to prevent President Obama from accomplishing anything whether the Republicans actually agree with the legislation or not. And despite that the then President accomplished much more than anyone expected. In the next 4 years I think  many Americans that didn't support President Obama will have to admit he was right.<br/>During President Obama's terms in office I often said that Barack and Michelle Obama were going to make a fortune on the speaking circuit and with several books. Good for them. The criticism I hear sounds like More racism and jealously. Particularly from the current President (so called)
When you have more money than one could ever spend, and yet keep hankering after ever more, even to taking money from speeches that you know your constituents have looked upon disfavorably, that you, yourself, wrote about disparagingly because of the distance it sets you from those constituents, then you have succumbed to 1% disease. The disease where so much is never enough. The reason the minions in Congress, the president and every lobbyist is working to funnel more to the top at their behest, through maneuvers big and small, is that they already suffer from that disease or hope to catch it soon. The  sickness that pervades the 1% is greed, avarice, blindness that their acquisition of more, more, more means a lot of others have less, less, less.
Wow! I must have missed something. When did we repeal the First Amendment.<br/>President Obama served his country with dignity, intelligence and honor. His family is a role model for the nation.<br/>He was treated with such disrespect by the GOP to be breathtaking in its arrogance and the unspeakable damage it did to our great nation.<br/>Now the New York Times has the temerity to criticize what he chooses to do as a private citizen.<br/>A higher standard would be for The Editorial Board of the New York Times to examine how it determined that this was any of their concern.
How much money has the past presidents gotten to speak?  That would include both Bushes, Clinton, and Carter.  I do not remember one article about those fees.  So the Blackman is not suppose to get paid?  That is right we are only suppose to work at McDonalds.
He had better give that money to a real charity, not his foundation or he is going to be criticized and rightly so, forever.  Why give the right wing animals a club to beat him and every future Democratic candidate?  It's beyond tone deaf, it's stupid and arrogant.  We have to do something about the need to buckrake post Presidency.  Here's my suggestion.  First, we double the salary.  Second, if the outgoing President agrees not to take speaker's fees beyond his expenses for five years after he/she leaves office, the Treasury gives him a lump sum of $25 million, or $50 million.  He can buy a really nice house, a really nice summer house, and use the royalties from book deals to furnish them.
Not everyone can be a Mahatma Gandhi or Mother Teresa, to eschew all worldly goods. I still respect President and Mrs, Obama; and I know they will use their well-earned money for good. Perhaps his speech might stir some consciences on Wall Street. 
No doubt that Obama is a charismatic figure. His books and early speeches made me vote for him twice--and enthusiastically, at first. But looking back, when did Obama walk the talk of concern for the 99%? When he supported a Mitt Romney scheme of healthcare as opposed to universal coverage? When he bailed out the Big Banks with no jail time for anyone in the 1% at the expense of millions kicked out of their homes? When he continued--or expanded--the misconceived US entanglement with deadly adventurism abroad from Guantanamo to Afghanistan? When he advocated neo-liberal foreign policies like support for the Trans-Pacific Trade Partnership? The man is another--although rather gifted--politician of the scammer class. No wonder multimillionaire Hillary, who took a ride on Obama's coattails rather than stand for something positive like Bernie Sanders' agenda, lost to another scammer. <br/><br/>Obama's $400,000 speech is just another confirmation that the electorate's choice is between open plutocracy or disguised plutocracy.  
Or, maybe, he's brazenly reaching into the pockets of the class who supported those making foul, false and disgusting attacks on him and his family for eight years or so. Just phone it in, keep raising the rates until they quit calling then go public with the joke.
 During his Presidency there was always a question, mostly from his African American constituency, about his commitment to the poor and left behind. In his speeches, where he sent his daughters to school and even his policies ---race to the top---there was always a hint of a bootstrap/corporate mentality. Although it is too early to call, I do not think we will see him building houses for the poor, but buying houses on the beaches in California. 
That's right Democrats tut tutting former President Obama's speaking fees, go ahead a flay another human being capable of doing great good for not being pure enough. Get those headlines right up there with POTUS Trump and Republican pay for play, staggering conflicts of interest, and ripping off of the American people - make that false equivalency really hum.  <br/><br/>While you are basking in superiority, go ahead and enjoy the effects of the Republican right-wing, leaning alt-right dominated Presidency, Senate, House, Supreme Court, state and local governments.  Count up the steps backwards in health care, civil rights, education, energy and foreign affairs.<br/><br/>And don't forget to pat yourself on the back for your role in making it all possible.
Why does Wall Street pay so much for "speeches" by politicians?  What is in it for them?  How can it be seen as anything but a payoff?
The Obamas are experiencing what other highly successful people, whether white, black, Democrat or Republican, experience.  Their intellect, education and dedication have catapulted them to the socioeconomic stratosphere. I suspect the air there is rarefied and intoxicating - and very addicting.  Let's hope, even if audaciously, that they remains true to their roots.  
I read this earlier today and my heart sank. One can argue that Obama is free to cash in as others have. True enough. But isn't a $65M book deal enough to stop feathering one's back account? Does the word "enough" register when one retires from Washington? Go ahead and give the speeches for 6 figures, but simply give it away to a worthy cause. I can't go through any twisted logic to excuse this from Obama or any other president. 
This editorial is very disturbing. I can not fathom the point here. Who should be paid for a speech? And which person paid is holding 'true' to their morals or ethics? Should ethical purity require a person to not seek money? Do we live in a free capitalist society? Should Republicans or Democrats be allowed to give a paid for speech? Or is it those seeking or in elected positions versus private citizens? Should black people be required to 'donate' or 'give back' a larger percentage of their income to support poor "minorities" as opposed to white people? Should Obama be 'content' with monies for his books and not seek any further income? Why is Trump's obvious greed tolerated? Is this about money and politics? So many questions raised, none answered in this editorial. Just a dig?
If a private entity is willing to pay President Obama 400,00 dollars to hear him speak , I would ask him to go for it . It is not taxpayer's money and unlike someone I know , Obama is going to speak in full and coherent sentences .<br/>What he does with the money is entirely his business !
I'm the last one to say how a man or woman should make their money.  So I am loathe to criticize President Obama for speaking to Wall Streeters, Bankers and the like after he has left public service as unseemly as it certainly appears.  My hope is that as a reasonable and moral figure Mr. Obama can reiterate the opening quote of this article and share his ideas with members of the top 1 percent.  The former president has repeatedly stated that he feels comfortable in the arena of public debate and argument.  In light of the lies and betrayal of the 99% offered by the current president maybe Mr. Obama can help shape hearts and minds of his audience who by nature aren't bad people, just isolated from the daily pains and struggles of the less wealthy.
You can't change corporate minds without hanging with them, letting them get to know you. And you can't express to them your opinions about changing corporate strategies without exploring their minds with thoughtful questions. There has to be dialogue, back and forth. Just because he is with them, doesn't mean he has forgotten all he learned in the 'mean streets'. These are the people who can influence and he is right to spend time with them.<br/><br/>Before you chastise him for accepting money for speaking engagements, the presidency does not pay much in the scheme of things. I find no fault in acquiring wealth. I wish I could. To give your children a comfortable future? That's fine if his policies don't change. And I don't think they will.
Americans' placed a great deal of hope in President Obama and just as equally believed he was going to change American politics.<br/>President Obama did a great job under difficult circumstances, and he performed with grace and dignity.<br/>There was no doubt he and his family were being judged by a higher standard than past presidents.<br/>And that is where the rub lies, after eight years of high expectations of President Obama, and hopes that he will help save us from our present circumstances, he appears to succumb to the siren's call of political cashing in after public service.<br/>He has every right to engage in all sorts of money making schemes, and we the public I guess have no right to draw a line in the sand about what we expect in a candidate, a public servant, and a past public servant. Oh, we can say rationalize President Obama's decision, but his actions continue the long slide of our politics and government.<br/>And so it goes
He's not running for office ever again. His legislative agenda can't be compromised by the money because he has no legislative agenda anymore. He's relaxed in the South Seas with the wealthy. Now he needs to speak truth to power--the real power: Wall Street.<br/><br/>I hope he releases transcripts of his speeches. I hope he turns them into another book. I hope people all across the political spectrum finally listen to what he has to say. 
The biggest lie ever told is that money is not everything.  Look further to those who have more control of tempering excessive salaries and encourage them to set the example in downgrading set incomes.  Start with Goldman Sachs and continue on down through the list where excess salaries and bonuses are metered out without any sense of integrity or concern.  They became well paid fat cats when the Obama and Summer economic plan started it's descent to an upward scale recovery and has really taken off the last two quarters.  Of course, Trump took credit but can't grasp what happened.  He's too self centered to think outside the box.  Stop the pilferage in big business and let them set the standard.  Obama is just enjoying his bonus for creating jobs and adding trillions to the economy.  Read about the real estate business fast reaching zero housing to sell in many parts of the country. A good indicator of recovery.
It's a little late for the Times to be worrying about speeches for big bucks to Wall Street.  Why wasn't Hillary advised not to do it, or not to try to deny the implications or try to keep the speeches secret?  Or why didn't the Times refrain from attacking the candidate, Sanders, who ran without this kind of support?  Does this represent a change of policy for the Times? We'll see.
I wonder if there would have been any criticism if he had accepted a lower fee, say, $50,000. He was paid to give a speech by a firm that could afford ten times that amount. <br/><br/>What? He should take less so that the liberals who mostly didn't support him and stood by and watched while their Republicans counterparts voted in the mid-term elections are placated? Please...these people couldn't even be bothered to keep Trump from being elected.
The question to ask, it seems to me, is whether any member of the sanctimonious board who crafted this editorial, would turn down an offer for a speech.  As Hillary so wittily and rightly said: "Well, they offered it to me." She was not about to turn it down, and I would certainly not turn it down, why should Mr. Obama? If we live by capitalist principles, we should be allowed to enjoy the fruits of capitalism in any way that we can. If we think capitalism should be contained by principles of fairness, then we may want to start by reigning in the outrageous compensation given to CEOs of health companies and insurance companies as well as any small time trader on Wall Street.  
This makes it look like President Obama was indeed on the take from Wall Street when his administration refused to pursue any criminal prosecutions from the 2008 financial crisis, and also when it weakened Dodd-Frank to prevent truly meaningful reform of the financial sector. The latter point is important because many have defended President Obama with respect to his speech by saying, "But he pushed through Dodd-Frank!" Dodd-Frank did not force the biggest banks to slim down, thus maintaining systemic risk that a failure of any one of them could bring down the entire economy like the Lehman bankruptcy did. Dodd-Frank also did not impose a tax on derivatives transactions, even though it was (and still is) widely supported, and also did not impose any limits whatsoever on executive compensation in the financial sector. <br/><br/>The bottom line is that no one thinks Dodd-Frank went far enough, the Obama Administration played a major role in making sure it didn't go far enough, and now we have tangible evidence as to why that was the case.
Personally, I am much less concerned by the optics of that speaking fee than I am with respect to our blindness with respect to the extent of President Trump's financial holdings.<br/><br/>President Obama cannot be surprised that this disclosure would cause a flurry in the public press. It remains to be seen what he does with the money, whether or not any of the current political noise is a factor in that decision.<br/><br/>Looking at the net worth (inflation adjusted) of our presidents, he's not that high on the list: <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Presidents_of_the_United_States_by_net_worth" title="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Presidents_of_the_United_States_by_net_worth" target="_blank">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Presidents_of_the_United_States_by...</a> . 
It would be very helpful if the press would share with us the gist of Mr Obama's comments from his $400,000 speech. Perhaps he pointed out to his audience that they were somehow responsible for the widening rift between the wealthy and the poor. And that social progress would require some understanding on the part of the rich of the plight and concerns of others. If that were so, I would commend Mr Obama for speaking truth to power and getting paid for it. Hopefully excerpts of his speech will become public. 
It should be more concerning that any group pays $400,000 to any one person to hear them speak, no matter who it is.  That a group has that much money to spend shows how much money is flowing around and still never lands on the people who need it most.  I respect &amp; miss Obama, but I still look forward to the next person, if Bernie can't get there, who will be committed to ending our country rule by Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch and the other groups, who can't possibly turn their vision to the poor.  It's not in them, and make no mistake, this country is run by the financial institutions, not the people.
We should all prepare ourselves for something that none of us anticipated—President Obama and Trump will move closer to each other. It won’t be because they can ever occupy the same space but it will be because the goals that both have set for themselves will require major shifts in political ideologies. <br/><br/>In order for Trump to get anything done, he’ll have to make compromises that his base will abhor; just like those of us who supported Obama will not like his compromises.  But, if Obama wants to build the library he envisions (instead of accepting a room of the University of Chicago’s existing law library), he’ll have to perform before those people who have the money to build his Presidential Library.  <br/><br/>Unfortunately, those who would like to have contributed to Obama’s library will have been disenfranchised by Trump’s movement to some semblance of a “center leaving only the super-rich to build the Obama Presidential Library.”<br/><br/>Obama’s is facing a future of diminishing returns, the longer he stays above the political fray, the less money he’ll be able to demand per speech.<br/><br/>It’s sad for old supporters but it’s the reality we all have to accept.
There is nothing wrong with Obama, or Hillary or Bush or Trump getting large sums of money for a speech.  Don't we pay multi millions to athletes, actors and actresses, singers, musicians? The larger issue is where do these people stand on reducing the wealth gap in our nation through progressive tax policies and universal health care.
This issue does present a conundrum-former Presidents would find it difficult to reenter the political world such as the Senate which Mr. Obama served in, or, go back to the life of reporting to a place of employment on a daily basis, accompanied by security personnel.  People do need an income, however, $400K does raise eyebrows.<br/>However, at least Mr. Obama didn't defile the People's House while in office with nepotism and profiteering from the status and importance of the Office of the President.
While I am dissapointed that president Obama would give such a speech I can't help but feel that the criticism is somewhat overblown.  This is a man who is retired from politics - or, at least, will probably not be seeking public office ever again. Quite a different situation from someone seeking future office.
So Cantor Fitzgerald pays Obama $400k for a speech.<br/>It isn't taxpayer money, like the $3 million it costs taxpayers every time Trump goes to Mar-a-Lago for the weekend.<br/><br/>$400k would be very little money to Cantor Fitzgerald, except that the company undoubtedly writes the entire cost off its taxes.<br/><br/>Not only is Obama no longer in office, he won't be seeking office in the future, so no influence is being bought. And nobody seems interested in what the substance of the speech might be. The people at Cantor Fitzgerald who green-lighted the speech may be paying Obama to politely scold them.<br/><br/>Maybe, rather than holding Obama to a higher standard than anyone else in the world, the focus should be on the extraordinary degree of venality displayed by the Trump administration virtually every single day.
Accepting a ridiculously high speaking fee and staying true to center left political views are not mutually exclusive. The man is now a private citizen and unless he becomes a lobbyist for the fossil fuel industry there is no reason to criticize him for accepting a speaking fee or multimillion dollar book deal. I am sure that Obama will be out there promoting progressive ideas. The guy has earned some time to do whatever he wants and to cash in by making a speech. Why anyone is worth $400,000 or even $150,000 for a speech is a mystery but in a free market the sponsors are free to pay what the market will bear.
"Is it a betrayal of that sentiment for the former president to have accepted a reported $400,000 to speak to a Wall Street firm? Perhaps not, but it is disheartening that a man whose historic candidacy was premised on a moral examination of politics now joins almost every modern president in cashing in."<br/><br/>Oh baloney. First of all, being POTUS is NOT well paid considering that it's a 24/7/365 x 4 or 8, job. And presidents (and their families) pay for a lot more of their expenses than most people realize. I have NO PROBLEM with his charging this or even more. Why? Because NO ONE is being FORCED to hire him. It's called "what the market will bear." Pretty simple consumer-driven economics.
I don't agree with the premise of this column, but I understand why it is raised.<br/>There was loud gnashing of teeth when Reagan started his post-presidential speech-making career.  Trump may still beat him, but for now Reagan holds the dubious honor of having run the most corrupt administration we have ever seen (based on the number of his administration convicted of crimes).    Reagan's moral standing was so low that to accept high fees seemed perfectly within reason.<br/>We are upset because, rightly or wrongly, we expect better from Obama.
There's nothing wrong with the Obama's making big money after leaving the White House. They've earned it. What is problematic is making big money off Wall Street speeches, a practice that in part doomed Hillary Clinton. Yes, Obama will not run for office again, but he is still influential in American politics, and he will be for a long time. By taking big Wall Street money, he will serve as a conduit to influence politicians both now and in the future. And then, he will be helping perpetuate the very thing that he decried during his tenure--the big money influence in politics that most Americans dislike today. If Jimmy Carter broke with that trend, Obama can too. 
There isn't enough money out there that would compensate President Obama for the absolute abuse he endured during the 8 years of his time in office. I for one hope he continues to make heaps of money and lives out the rest of his years in the lap of luxury. Thank You for your service Mr. President. I wish you good health and happiness. You deserve it. 
I wish we were hearing what he said instead of what he got paid. He's making $65 million on book deals, so I doubt he's speaking for the money. Maybe he wants to address audiences with the wherewithal to pay their speakers that. Better him than anyone else I know. 
Leave him alone!  He's a private citizen now.  What he will say is important because of who he is, that should be our interest.  What he charges is nobody's business.  Good for him.  
Seems to me there's an easy solution: give the speech, take the fee and contribute it to the causes he espouses.  Sort of the Robin Hood approach.
I'm a big fan of Obama. I think, he is probably one of the best presidents this country ever had. But, I was little disheartened by this paid speech. I wanted him to be one of the best politicians this world has ever seen.
The speaking industry is well established. Authors, scientists, professors, athletes, and executives all participate in this lucrative  industry and make millions. But here's what everyone seems to forget: you are asked to speak based on YOUR expertise...not based on the audeince you're speaking to. You might tailor for the audience, but it is still content based on your experience, research and background. Republicans, the media, etc have completed twisted this into an act of collusion. That's not how it works and anyone who's given a professional speech knows that.<br/>Please, Democrats, focus your outrage on Trump (as a sitting President) speaking to the NRA. Focus on the numerous areas of conflict of interest with him and his family.<br/>Democrats would do well to take a page from the Republicans and learn to circle the wagons. Deflect these non issues and offer unfailing support to party leaders (past and present) All of the ridiculous infighting just splinters the party further and fuels the opposition.
Barack Obama and family survived eight years in the biggest fishbowl in the world, with dignity and grace.  Now, many people appear to have convinced themselves that the Trump Family is the new normal and it is perfectly fine for the sitting President to nudge laws toward Trump Family enrichment.<br/>All one has to do as an ethics guide is imagine President Obama behaving in the same way as President Trump.  Can't do it? Neither can I.<br/>Now, eight years on Barack Obama is in a position to take speaking fees in the hundreds of thousands of dollars...I say he and his family earned them. 
I knew when Obama picked Geithner and Goldman Sachs people  for key financial positions that there was going to be little difference with the Bush Administration in regards to economic policies. That he agreed to $400k for a speaking to Cantor Fitzgerald should surprise nobody.
Obama recently announced very clearly his plans to support our young people. I don't know what he talked about in his recent speech, but speaches are a great way to communicate his amazing desire to make this a better country and world and/or support his efforts.<br/><br/>Responses of immediate criticism show the shallowness of the critics.
"But why not elevate a new generation of political leaders and stay true to his values by giving his speech fees to his foundation and other charities focused on those goals?" Does this advice from the Times to President Obama strike anyone else as a bit--or more than a bit--patronizing? I find it difficult to imagine the Times giving similar advice to Presidents Reagan either President Bush, or --in the future--President Trump. President Obama is quite capable of deciding how to use his future earnings, no advice from the editorial room needed. 
Mr. Obama is a private citizen. He served his country well for eight years in a scandal-free administration. Now he deserves to earn whatever the market will bear for his speeches. Why not focus on the current POTUS who is enriching himself and his family WHILE IN OFFICE, refusing to release his tax returns and refusing to divest himself of his businesses?
Yes a betrayal which should effectively remove his voice from the future restructuring that the Democratic party requires. 
He should cash in. All this criticism of him accepting 400K is ridiculous. How much should he be allowed to earn? What's an acceptable number?
Even the good guys, it's sad to say, have their moments of bad judgement.
Two memberships at Mar A Lago. That's the cost.<br/><br/>The left is in a tizzy over speeches and whose purity test is more pure. Who liked the band before they got a record deal. Trump voters are now gleefully supporting getting our healthcare slashed. Please focus, people. Or perhaps wait and see what he says? Perhaps Wall Street might need to hear from some people who want to see oversight and reform?
It's not the money that interests me. What interests me is the speech that he is delivering for that $400K. Care to share the transcripts?
Part of the reason why I didn't vote for Hilary Clinton was the speaking fees she took from Wall Street.<br/><br/>Similarly, they didn't need the money. They're rich already. Why do it? Greed? Or that's how they measure their self worth now? Is it bravado? Obama I thought was above this.
$400,000 is what each voice actor from "The Simpsons" makes per episode. President Obama is out of office. If he wants to generate revenue for his foundation by giving paid speeches, good for him!
Unfortunately, it's becoming the standard. Governor Christie has no plans after his term ends except that he wants to make money. And when you make friends among the wealthiest, you get a piece of the pie.
There's a serious double standard here with regard to speaking fees.  Certain people understandably command higher fees.  Why should Obama, or HRC, refuse fees that other notable speakers gladly accept, and do so without criticism.  Secondly, for all you know, he and Michelle may be donating huge chunks of his earnings to charity and/or other important causes.  Your criticism is unfair and unwarranted. 
I don't share the outrage.  Let him speak.  Who knows what he's going to talk about?  It could be very constructive.  I do not begrudge him for earning a living.  And a good one at that.  After eight years -- and not profiting from the office while IN office, unlike another President I know -- let him have a life.  
I have a major issue with this influence-peddling, and applaud the New York Times for calling Mr. Obama to task. It is about the money and enriching oneself from the largesse of Wall Street. But even more importantly it is about the influence, and being purchased by the very same people who, as Mr. Obama himself wrote, are only concerned with the top 1%, and not with the welfare of the rest of the nation. It is incredibly tone deaf. Didn't we hear every candidate in the most recent presidential election lambaste Hillary Clinton for accepting Wall Street payments? Taking several hundred thousand dollars from Wall Street is the political equivalent of setting oneself up to be tarred and feathered by his party. Mr. Obama cashed in $400,000 of personal brand equity that would have been hundreds of times more valuable in influence in the coming years. 
Alas. The lure of over polishing the nest egg. Already those who were Hyde Park co-residents with the Obama's when Michelle worked at the University of Chicago in the nineties saw that unseemly side when she accepted, probably because of her husband's political success,  an unduly high salary in University Administration...a salary deeply resented by hospital personnel We had forgotten all that in her many good works and her superb role as first lady. But now back again in everyday life?? Say it isn't so Michelle. 
I disagree profoundly with this editorial -- and the spill-over of criticism by "progressive" Democrats. At times liberals can be as absolute in their views as Tea Party blowhards. They create a type of purity test that is unrealistic except in their circles. The Bernie Sanders camp, in particular, seems always ready to condemn a man who is fortunate enough to have a good pay out.<br/><br/>The relevant issue of outside money is whether it buys favors from people in political office. Obama is a private citizen and has no such leverage to trade. <br/><br/>Should he be held to a higher standard of behavior? Perhaps but we have to wait and see how he uses the money. The blessing of a big payday is not an ethical "failure." Where would liberal critics draw the line for an "approved compensation?" Or would they prohibit him from speaking to Wall Street executives at all? C'mon, man.<br/><br/>One could argue that ethical failure is when these same liberal critics call on Obama to support their cause after slamming him. Or when they have the gall to beg his supporters to vote for the liberal agenda after disrespecting their hero.<br/><br/>So let's take a deep breath and give the brother a break. Trust that he will do the right thing in private life as he tried to do in public.
Obama has now proven himself to be no better or worse than the rest of us despite years of finger-wagging and preaching.  Not exactly a shock to me, but there are many who will see this as an outright betrayal. So it goes with demigods after their time in the spotlight is over.  Better make hay while the sun shines Barack.
Sad...disappointing.  In my long life half of the presidents came from wealth--Kennedy, Johnson, the Bushes, Trump or were pretty wealthy when they assumed the office-- Nixon, Reagan.  Eisenhower, Ford, Carter, Clinton, Obama were not wealthy men.  President Carter stands alone as the one humble man who returned to his home in Plains, GA to assume his simple life and to work for global peace without needing to line his pockets with outsized cash.  Maybe not a great president, but a great man.  I cannot envision Carter hanging out with the wealthy in their playgrounds upon leaving office.  He was too busy running his peanut farm and building homes for Habitat for Humanity.  I hope President Obama returns in his heart and actions to his roots that made him so appealing.  But money is everything in this Gilded Age II.<br/>However it is still the Democrats who truly care about the less fortunate...just look at what Ms. Clinton wanted to accomplish and Trump's fluctuating goals. It is truly tragic for our country that she was unable to clearly outline her values, but became mired in policy solutions that didn't reach enough hearts.  And taking money from Wall St. didn't help.<br/>President Obama, please don't let us down.  Travel to Plains and hang out with Jimmy for a spell.  Learning to kite surf is really not that important.  You deserved a little R and R,  but please return as your intelligent, thoughtful. reserved self. 
Two political leaders that come to my mind, for example, Thomas Jefferson and Ernesto Che Guevara, would never had enriched themselves in this way.
Obama is just another hypocrite politician who spoke empty words of fighting for the middle class while in office, only to stuff his pockets with unmatched greed just weeks after his failed tenure in the White House. There is no question that the Democrats are no different than the Republican politicians that they criticize as being "for the rich". 
As a president it was easy for him to hobnob with people of enormous wealth.  He could play golf with them, socialize with them in the name of addressing issues etc.  As a private citizen, he does not have that much influence and he simply cannot move with the rich crowd that easily.  And that is where these extra sources of income come in.  A millionaire trying to be in the billionaires club.  Obama of 1994 would have done many things differently; he would have shunned these fees; established his presidential library in the Washington Park etc.  But now it is simply new vanity - money and the showmanship are part of it.
$400,000 from Wall Street?  He should have held out for $500,000.<br/><br/>Everyone knows money talks.  That's the sum of our values in this country:  if you have money, you have worth, you have influence.  The rest of us?  Meh.  Not very nice, but very true.  <br/><br/>You must earn the money to spend the money to do good.  Bill Gates and Warren Buffett, two individuals who were astute enough to amass great wealth, understand that they were in the right place at the right time with the right skills.  They possess the abilities of many Americans, but realize that they happen to be the lucky ones and try to spread their good fortune around.  They are true philanthropists, unlike other billionaires who, the richer they get, just use their money to bilk more people.<br/><br/>Mr. Obama is unlikely to amass the wealth of either Mr. Gates or Mr. Buffett, but from watching him closely over these last eight years and having read his books I believe he will set a very high standard for using the money he makes for doing good.  He is a man with dignity and strength of character.  He will not forget ordinary Americans.  He will spread his good fortune around.  I wish I could predict the same about our next ex-president.
Might it not be more important to ask not how much he is being paid for making a speech, but rather what is it he might have to say to his audience of Wall Street moguls? Perhaps even millionaires and billionaires can gain perspective if given the opportunity to learn more about how the 99% lives.
The man surely has something to say.  I only wish that he had announced an array of speaking engagements, with price tags attached, and that some of those engagements would have been gratis to groups who also want to hear from him, but aren't in the $400K league.  
It is not the amount of money he will be making , but what he does with it that counts.  Out of office we are holding him to higher standard then the current president who is doing mind boggling conflict of interest dealings  that should involve impeachment proceedings.  I would expect former presidents to use their contacts and status to help others around world, and not worry about it becoming political hot air.   
It is the American way, actually its pretty much the same way everywhere — political service for profit (often staggering profit).<br/><br/>As of 2016 the combined net worth of the Obama household was something on the order of $20 million. Certainly not paltry by most measures. Post presidency prospects to multiply that many fold look lucrative indeed.<br/><br/>So it was as well for the Clintons who’s combined net worth now reputedly hovers in the $50 million range.<br/><br/>List of All President’s Net Worth.
Its good that he speak to a wide variety of audiences and Wall street needs to hear from the likes of Obama. They should pay big money for it while the former President will speak to less fortunate groups for much less or for free. Lets wait for the speach and for what he now tries to convey to the .1%.
Mr. Obama has lost the moral high ground by accepting these speaking fees from wall street and has let down millions of his fans who took vacations, traveled to other states and knocked on doors for a genuine change in this country. WHY does he need another a few millions when he is already getting almost 65 millions for his book deal? It is still not too late for him to redeem his legacy and announce to donate these speaking fees to charitable foundations (not his own foundation) and public institutions committed to preserving our freedoms and free press.
I thought that the book deal would provide a rather hefty cushions for the Obamas and allow them to continue working in public service in the broadest term possible. These paid speeches make me pause. I earn $400,000 for two hours talking to a group of the well heeled. Impact???? The speaker's fee is a source of corruption: who pays the $400,000? Does it count as a deduction? I understand that the Obamas should not be held to a different standard. But they set a high standard of personal conduct while at the White House and they surely must worry about the impression this act conveys.  
Considering that the Obamas didn't have a single scandal during the 8 years he was president I'd say they are worth their weight in gold.  What have we been seeing for the past 100 days?  Not a cabinet with qualms about stiffing the American people.  Not a president who is trying to do his best for all Americans, naturalized, on the verge of being naturalized, or born here.  Not a Congress that cares about fixing our so-called health care system unless it involves helping the economic health of the health care industry.  Trump has done one thing that could be called decisive:  he ordered the bombing of Syria and for that the media decided he was presidential.  He was presidential for all of about 30 seconds.  Then he reverted to form.<br/><br/>Let's wait and see what Obama does with the money before we scold him.  Perhaps he has a few good uses in mind for it.  One is certainly going to be applying it to his children's college educations.  I'm sure they will appreciate being able to graduate from college debt free.  As to the rest, let's give him a chance.
I have no issues with my beloved President hauling in that type of money, especially when the mentally ill current one won't reveal to the public anything about his taxes. President Obama isn't a crook. He isn't a dishonest person. He is a kind person who set a wonderful example for eight years along with his lovely, bright wife. No, I have no issue with President Obama's earning power in marked contrast to the truly horrible person now sitting in the Oval Office. 
Already the news media is portraying President Obama's two terms in office on a very positive note.  Other than the passage of Obamacare and his last minute executive orders on climate change, Mr. Obama performed in the same mode of his predecessors.  His performance does not deserve to be ranked above average.  Trump's incompetence, rapacious and viscous agenda is what makes Mr. Obama look pretty good.  He lacked the political will to close Guantanamo quickly.  He continued and expanded the Bush-Cheney wars against the Muslim world.  He prevented Eric Holder from prosecuting the senior executives of Wall Street following the 2008 collapse.  He prevented making the Bush Administration accountable for torture but refused  to pardon Edward Snowden for revealing Obama's violation of the constitution.  Even Congress was in the dark.  He did virtually nothing, nothing to stop the avalanche of home foreclosures.  He continued the blatantly illegal domestic spying of all electronic communications.  He continued the policies of previous administrations of the executive branch making unilateral decisions to unleash military aggression without approval from Congress and in violation of the War Powers Resolution of 1973.  So it is befitting and very much in-line with recent Presidents for Mr. Obama to cash-in on his post-presidential retirements.  Let's be honest, all high profile government personnel, members of Congress and retired military generals have done the same thing.
After HRCs  huge speaking fees from Wall St. firms became a major issue that fueled an insurgent Sanders campaign that carried over in the general election and helped elect Trump, the spectacle of one of the least corrupt and morally unassailable Presidents in history doing the same is disheartening.  <br/><br/>Barack, you are already worth $12million with a $60 million book deal. You want for no exotic guest--vacations on billionaires' yachts.  What experience or possession is denied you from now until your life is over?  Have you learned nothing from the resentment of American voters, so weary and distrustful of elitist rich liberal Democratic politicians , that they sat out the last election, voted for fringy 3rd party candidates, or voted for Trump? <br/><br/>Listen to your own advice: "Don't do stupid stuff".
Pay the man. Odds are he will do something good with it. In contrast to...
Even if this dinner is a case of the rich guys need another reason to dress up, and some will say that. Some will demean and want to color it with the "see we told you brush". First, and let's get this outta' the way, "money people" are notorious for saying thank you with cash, they don't like being made to look unappreciative and almost unwittingly they "lean" on cash..someone had to say it..sorry, and by the same token there are millions, yes millions of folks out here that don't travel in those circles (you know, we Dems version of "Joe the plumber") and would truly love an opportunity to first say thank you and a close, very close second would be a chance to listen to some of Mr. Obamas insights on a lot of "stuff" really. There are a couple of drivers here; there are still a lot of Americans that know a good job when we see one and it can serve as the beginning of a "progressive promotional tour" sponsored, at least in part, hopefully by wealthy folks who we would all hope realize their "position" is only strengthened by messages from the left and carried, this time anyway by a true leader.  
Two Thoughts.  As the otherwise execrable Ruth Marcus asked in her April 28th Washington Post column, "Is $60 million really not enough for the Obamas?", the answer is "Clearly not."  I'm sure that the Obamas' sense of how much is enough is informed by their awareness that the parasitic Clintons have, post Presidency, racked up an impressive reported net worth of $111,000,000.  Seen in the light of the needing to keep up with one's perceived peers, I'm sure that Barak and Michele deem that $400,000 per speech not merely acceptable but as absolutely essential.  To this level of deranged, unhinged greed, I can only repeat the pro tip that the economist Mark Blythe tried to pass on to the plutocratic class the Obamas aspire to:  "To my American hedge fund friends, the Hamptons is not a defensible position.  Eventually, people will come for you."  The revolution will not be televised.  
Obama has every right to cash in in his post-presidency years and join the ranks of the 1%. By doing so he has forfeited his right to speak for the other 99% of us. 
Wait, What?!<br/>Democrats think their party is out of touch?<br/>Really?<br/>The party that forced Hillary upon us?  The party that systematically worked to marginalize Bernie Sanders?<br/>As an independent who votes left I have a lot of acquaintances who voted for Trump. When i ask them how they could do such a stupid thing, their response is almost universal:<br/>Better than voting for her!<br/>All the problems we have now and for the next 1358 days are because of the democrats out-of-touchness.<br/><br/>Can't wait to read the transcript of Obama's speech!
The $400,000 Obama speech falls at a bad time for many people who have hopes that, perhaps, the political and economic mindset of America will shift towards less corporate control and more concern for the lives of the average American.<br/><br/>We have to remember that no one went to jail after the 2008 crash that almost took out our economy.  Many people with power and influence --- insiders --- colluded to engineer a massive bubble that took $trillions out of our collective wealth.  But this was OK!  It was NOT a crime!  The Obama Justice Department said so by refusing to prosecute individuals.  But corporations paid a few $billions in fines on $hundreds of billions (if not $trillions) of plunder.  Obama gave them a free pass.  Corporate crime is NOT a crime.<br/><br/>Hillary lost because her connections with Wall Street and corporations was just too much for some.  Her campaign was run in the save enclaves of the professional class of "coastal elites."  That was the perception of many voters.  Many did not like the way the nominations was tilted in her favor against Bernie Sanders.<br/><br/>Anyone with a simplistic view that the rich have simply bought control of our country would look at Obama's speech for confirmation and validation.<br/><br/>Just who is going to stand up to Wall Street and the huge corporations?  If we can turn our eyes away from the distraction of the Trump Clown Show, we see corporate-sponsored bills just waiting to be rammed through by a Republican Congress and the signing desk.  
It is ironic that a person who cannot leverage is berated, while another, one by far the most in need of Times counsel on tax returns, conflicts of interest, and general monstrousness, flouts every norm with impunity.
I have always admired both Obamas for their dignity, decency, intelligence and thoughtfulness. I hope they are not going to tarnish these with greed, of which we get enough from Trump and all his indignity, indecency, stupidity and thoughtlessness. One $ 400,000 fee speaking fee, which is an obscenity in itself, can undo a lot. The last thing we need is another statue with feet of clay landing on top of us. We are disgusted enough as it is with Trump. Let's just hope that the Obamas won't also be make us throw up on them.
It became evident early on in both the Obama and Trump presidency's that the POTUS has become but a spokesman for unelected powerful bureaucrats in the Washington-NY-Hollywood based MI complex, their interaction with the people but a charade to sow conflict among partisans to keep the country divided and on edge. While the people are bickering and at each other's throats fighting over crumbs it's easier to loot the treasury and milk system don't you see?<br/><br/>Frank Zappa "we're only in it for the money" circa about 50 years ago. The Woodstock generation and Great Society lost the fight for America's soul and Dr Strangelove won. They're both Dems and Repubs cashing in at the expense of a free and fair society.
It's absurd that people, including Senators Warren and Sanders, are critical of Obama's speech without hearing what he has to say!  If the man changes his message or his character, that would be worthy of concern.  But speaking to a Wall Street firm about health care?  It might even have a positive impact!<br/><br/>I suppose no matter what Obama does will be criticized by the right, left and middle.  He could stand on a soap box in Times Square and give a speech and be called a rabble-rouser.  Bah!!!!  Best wishes Mr. Obama!!!! I loved most of your presidency and wish you were still there!
Dumb move by Obama.  Does he really need the money that bad?  Just like the rest of the ex-politicians trying to cash in on their past.  This does not set the example a young citizen can aspire to.
Obama has made it impossible to disagree with Trump on the hypocrisy and unabashed surrender to self interest and special interest by career politicians.
I totally disagree with the sentiment expressed in this Editorial - nobody publicly took more arrows for EIGHT YEARS from those who could not stand seeing a black man in the white house, and now Barack Obama has a chance to share his thoughts free of political consequences...When we begin to judge what/how much a person "should" earn, we're going down a slippery slope - it is and should be whatever the market will bear.
What secret has he been hiding for 8 years that could possibly justify $400,000 for one hour. If this is not bribery, what is? He certainly thinks the anti bribery laws do not apply to him. Sad!
President Obama is retired; he is no longer leader of the Democratic party - but that doesn't mean he has to enter some kind of political purdah or take a vow of poverty. Like it or not, money is what controls politics these days and if you want to be a player you need access to it. <br/><br/>Don't complain about Obama 'cashing in' until you see what he does with the money. If Citizen's United showed us that money is speech, Obama is going to need a megaphone to communicate his messages to the world. There are vast amounts of money buying policies and shaping minds in ways that are bad for the public good. We shouldn't insist that Obama 'take a knife to a gun fight' as the saying goes if he wants to offer alternatives.<br/><br/>The Times should also consider what this call for purity looks like to people of color. How come the establishment doesn't like the idea of a black man doing what all his white predecessors have done and getting what he's earned?<br/><br/>If the NY Times is so concerned about the example Obama is setting, the Times should be calling right now for the impeachment of Donald Trump, a man who is using the office of the Presidency to enrich himself and his family right before our eyes. That alone should be sufficient, regardless of all the other scandals around him. <br/><br/>So, what's it going to take before the Times editorial board gets around to that? Given Trump's performance to date, I shudder to think about it.
I would hope president Obama would indeed donate the money from these speeches to his foundation...it is likely this was the plan all along.<br/><br/>In any case, when the American people choose to put a man like Trump in the whitehouse with all the kleptocratic implications that it entails, I think railing at Obama being paid for his speeches is small potatoes.
Jimmy Carter is a God.  Obama is looking like the Republican he governed as.  <br/><br/>While I will never forget the pure elation I felt the night he was elected in 2008, nor will I forget calling the White House, utterly disgusted a short four months later asking for my $50.00 campaign donation back. <br/><br/>Hope and change, ha!  Trump is a creature of his party's creation, pure and simple. 
When former President Carter speaks, I listen carefully because I know that what he is saying is not tainted in any way, shape, or form by anything except what he truly believes. I would hope that a $65 million book deal would be enough money that a former President would have not have to prostitute himself giving paid speeches.
As I understand it, the subject matter of the speech is healthcare.  One thing we know is that Obama is familiar with every detail of the ACA.  So I ask: if the reason for his speech is to discuss how the ACA can be improved to the benefit of citizens; and/or the affect the ACA has had in moving American discourse toward universal/single payer healthcare which will affect 1/5 of the economy and insurance companies are best advised to take into account this change in public sentiment; and if the $400,000 fee goes directly to his foundation or one of the many other charities the Obamas support to the tune of 20% of their income...should/would the cry that he avoid the speech and the fee change?<br/>I'm all for liberals always going "high" but there is no level playing field with the right....and liberals are always set up to be taken down with the smallest of transgression.  Republicans can elect a vile, unethical, braggart, know-nothing making money off the Office while in office and pay no penalty.  How about an editorial about the charitable giving of rich democrats v. rich republicans; the views of rich democrats on wealth inequality v. the view of rich republicans; the views of rich democrats on social safety nets and their willingness to pay for it v. republicans.  This view that only "poor" democrats are true to the cause is not only ridiculous, it's an argument you're ceding to the right, which they are only too happy, irony-free to use to label liberals "hypocrites".  
How absolutely demoralizing. Hopefully Barack Obama will realize the existential error of his " because I could" moment, and donate the proceeds of this speech, and all subsequent ones, to charity. If not he will forever tarnish his legacy. The book deal is justly deserved. The honorarium for speeches has a squalid, sordid, legacy, that is beneath him to accept.
Who said he won't be donating these fees? I expect he will. As I expect he will use much of his book payout to support his foundation. <br/><br/>Did the Editorial Board ask him?
The financial crisis resulted in tremendous damage to our country.  There was obvious fraud.  But no indictments by the Obama Administration-our major institutions have failed us.  Taking money from Wall Street is so ugly &amp; a poor decision by Obama.<br/>Only 19% of our population trust the government.  We have been let down by Supreme Court -Citizens United.  Federal Reserve with the Financial Crisis.  The failure of our of institutions is one reason why we got the Trump disaster.  It is sad.
Remember Billy Tauzin?  While serving in Congress, he worked for his constituents in name only, representing the interests of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association faithfully.  He was rewarded with a $2 million annual salary as their CEO right after leaving Congress.<br/><br/>All politicians in or out of office should use the "grandmother test":  Act in all things in a manner such that you could tell what you did to your grandmother without her being ashamed.<br/><br/>Since a tender age, we all knew what were the right and proper things to do.  Politicians must not carry a dominant form of that gene.  After watching Bob McDonnell defend his tawdry actions on 60 Minutes last night because it was "legal" under the laws of Virginia, I remain more convinced.  Billy Tauzin, Donald Trump and most sadly Barack Obama now have much in common with the former Virginia governor.
Lots of comments on the "bad optics" unless he makes a point of publically donating the money to something worthy. I'll bet he does.
You talk about a fee taken after he is no longer president, and do not have a big article about a tax cut plan, complete with no Estate Tax that will PAY the current president a BILLION dollars. Fair and Balanced?
I will wait to judge President Obama on what he chooses to do with the money he earns.  If past is prologue, I trust he will choose wisely.
If a Wall St firm has $400,000 to spend, why not on a speech about affordable health care by the president who made it a priority.  Better than using it to lobby a current office holder at any level.<br/><br/>I trust the Obamas' integrity completely.  What they do with their hard earned wealth is their business, but I have a feeling it will contribute to the greater good.
So odd to reach the conclusion that among the three Presidents Carter, Obama, and Trump it is Trump and Obama who are more alike.  But in point of greed, of covetousness, of the "decent regard to the opinions of mankind" of which our Founding Fathers wrote...  <br/><br/>How can this "honorarium" be seen as anything but the first of many paybacks for his refusal to prosecute bankers for ignoring their fiduciary duties?  He kept them out of jail, now they're stuffing his pockets, as he let them stuff the pockets of Hillary Cliinton and her husband.  <br/><br/>Hope and change was the Obama slogan.  Change?  Here's an instance of it; change for the worse, from the outsider who might be, might stay clean; change for one-hand-washes-the-other, for the sordid behaviour that we hoped, with him, United States politics would leave behind.  Change, and no hope.  <br/><br/>And, in Barack Obama, no shame.
We sure do need a hero right now, and I too nominate Obama as the perfect candidate- but maybe at this point he's come to the conclusion that the American people don't deserve any more sacrifice on his behalf.  <br/><br/>The man has just given 8 years of blood, sweat and tears to try to improve this country and the country only gave him 2 years to actually get much done.  After voters sabotaged most of his presidency by turning congress over to lunatics they followed it up by allowing the biggest lunatic of all to replace him on the promise to destroy what Obama did manage to accomplish during his crippled presidency. <br/><br/>At this point, if Obama chooses to focus on reaping whatever rewards his fame can bring him, who can blame him?  I'll blame the American people for squandering his immense talent when he was in a position to use it on their behalf.  
The only moral compass of a post presidency in my lifetime has been Jimmy Carter. Like him or not, his example shines.
Wealth is not the enemy, its uses are the criteria for judgement.<br/>Should they, instead, adopt the sack-cloth ?<br/>I will not judge solely on this episode. Time will determine the value of the Obamas, independent of their 'worth'.
The man and his wife gave abundantly over the course of his professional career.  Now you want to use him as an example for one paid talk?   On balance, he does far more good than any recent member from the public service sector, and it will take resources ($$) to get new initiatives off the ground.  Why not take from the 1% to support opportunities for the 99%?   So many stories out there - and you pick the low fruit.  Shame. 
Really?  Do the editors really think he would be different? From the day of the Nobel Peace Prize (apparently earned by Hope) it was pretty clear the legacy would be based on talk and symbolism rather than follow through since it was not required of him.<br/><br/>Let's be honest:  they are all pretty much all the same...I suspect that is why enough people got fed up and voted for Trump.
By this and going with a publisher whose parent institution allowed to let go with only a slap on the wrist, Obama has made it impossible not to agree with Mr. Trump, despite everything that I may not like about the latter, that career politicians do stink.
No surprise here. Did any of the Wall St or banking crooks who destroyed thousands of lives go to jail on Obama's watch? Instead, Eric Holder was making trips to Jamie Dimon's castle for lunch breaks. Obama is and has always been a neoliberal elitist. Lots of beautiful speechs, charm and grace, but in the end he did not deliver for working people or poor-because he didn't want to.
Ok.  I get it, but after pointing this out it's really move along, nothing to see here.  The problem is that this will get legs in the news and FOX  could treat it as proof of some sort for all their lies. Trump meeting with the dictator of the Philippines and all the deals he has been making for his family and cronies etc etc will be no big deal to them.
You sentimentalized Obama.  In summer 2008 I noticed that Obama had raised far far more money than McCain.  No banker went to prison after the debacle of 2008.  So what he is doing now is par for the course.<br/><br/>We all have a tendency to divide people into good and bad.  Once we do that, we cannot hear something a little bad about a "good person" or something good about a "bad person".<br/><br/>This is why we brush under the rug the fact that Sarah Palin was the first female governor of Alaska and her approval ratings as governor were consistently higher than Obama's ratings as president.<br/><br/>That does NOT mean, "Palin good, Obama bad."  It only means, "reality is complicated."
I was a sanders supporter who cared about these types of issues more than anyone, but this is not an issue. If he's not running for office, who cares? The problem was Hillary Clinton running for office while getting paid off. I had no problem with Bill getting paid, as long as they stayed private citizens.
It is extremely disappointing to see that President Obama is hobnobbing with the Wall Street banksters who were instrumental in causing 2008 economic collapse. Other than Elizabeth Warren &amp; Sanders, most of the rest of the Democrat elites are in the pockets of special interests, Wall Street in particular. The Republicans are far worse. The Supreme Court is squarely responsible with their verdict on Citizens United.  Change and hope and Make America Great  are nothing but deception. 
The Obamas have earned their right to a nice life.  They have experienced the best during the presidency and want their two girls to attend colleges without the worry of cost.  I noticed that during the presidency, their donations to important causes were generous.  The Obamas did not come from wealth and unfortunately have to work for the good life.  If someone is willing to pay President Obama that much for a speech, it just takes the pressure off the couple ... particularly this couple who have endured so much criticism during their eight years in the White House.  If fact, they endured so much criticism, that maybe it should  stop.
I see the contrast between a Western leader and Eastern leader in their life style - both in dress code and moral compass. Gandhi discard his western dress and accept lion cloths and took a one year rail journey on third class compartment to know the country and its people. In the West, the leaders are always dressed in finest cloths and travel as royal party and make photo stops at a middle class diners. People in the West in Internet world find out the hollowness of this social service. That is why there is more respect for Bill Gates and Trump as they are supposed to spend their own money to do social service. Obama comes from a different background - he can change the style and bring the simplicity and humility in the Western leadership culture - it is a Flat world. People in heart can easily feel the difference between diamonds and glass - irrespective of cultural history.
I'm sick and tired of the hypocrisy in demanding Obama live his post presidential life like a saint.<br/><br/>It may be considered somewhat jarring that he should choose to go on the speaker circuit, but it's certainly not illegal or even wrong. Many people give paid speeches. Why should Obama forgo his speaker fee just because you or anyone else thinks the optics are not good? Who appointed him St. Barack of the Order of the Democratic Party?<br/><br/>I think part of the issue is that Trump is so crass and money hungry that we want to keep holding up Obama as the example of goodness and purity as a counter argument to Trumps excesses. But Obama is not beholden to our image of how he should behave. Not every ex-President must go build houses for Habitat for Humanity even if it would be a nice precedent. Obama served as president for 8 years and did a pretty good job. He's now a private citizen, and even if he us a party elder, he's really beholden to no one and should be allowed to make decisions about his life in retirement without our interference. As far as I'm concerned, he should be paid as much as people are willing to pay.<br/><br/>If the Democratic Party, Elizabeth Warren, Bernie Sanders, or anyone else has a problem with this, it's their problem. The DNC needs to figure out how to get in touch with the average voter no matter what a Obama does. Don't use him as a whipping boy for the Democrats' problems.<br/><br/>Leave Obama alone. 
Presidents traditionally cash in after they leave office; I have no problem with it.  However, given the current status of the Democratic Party, the optics of Obama's speech are awful.    A crisis of Democratic leadership combined with an uncomfortable relationship with Wall Street and the 1% make my skin crawl; right now, Obama is doing nothing that assures me of the Party's commitment to bring forth a new dynamic generation of leaders.<br/>The publicly visible part of the Democratic Party would be well advised to address this,  As a lifelong Democrat, and a member of multi-generational Democratic family, I am almost to the point where I will join a third party that is more responsive to its members.
There is no cure for greed. It should have been obvious to Mr. Obama that having gone through the contentious election where income inequality featured prominently on the democratic side,  his decision to accept these fees would raise eyebrows. <br/><br/>He has done a great job of pulling this nation from its troubles with dignity  and we continue to look up to him for inspiration during his post presidential life . Accepting these exuberant fees was uncharacteristically myopic . Just because past presidents did it does not mean he should do it.<br/><br/>Besides , $65M isn't enough ?
I wholeheartedly agree with this editorial.  There are few upstanding individuals today who have the kind of influence Obama has.  Of course he has the right to do whatever he wants.  It's just an enormous shame and lost opportunity that this is what he chose. It is another reason to be cynical about our leaders.
Yes, it is a betrayal, not just of the values he claimed were prominent but also of the people who voted for him. He was eloquent and personal, speaking directly to the people while he was president. Now his words are private and handsomely rewarded by just the sort of people Who voted for Trump.<br/>Am I disgusted? No, merely disappointed. No hope. No change.
He's already rich and about to get much richer from a book deal. He doesn't need this speaking fee, but he'll take it anyway. And from a health care conference, no less. While millions struggle to pay deductibles. It's a huge disconnect and incredibly tone deaf. The man is as inspirational a political figure as I've seen in my lifetime ... on the campaign trail. In office he was cautious and largely protected the status quo, surrounded by Wall Street advisers. So this is disappointing but not surprising, I guess, although with everything that has happened I had really hoped for more from him as a former president. The effect of this is to diminish hope and increase cynicism.
And so yet again we have to engage in false equivalency. No, this is nowhere near the level of self aggrandizement the is being performed on a daily basis by President Trump. Trump's people pilloried HRC for her speaking fees, and you bought into it. Now you're inclined to do the same thing with President Obama. No, I'm sorry, but this is not corruption. What right do we have to tell President Obama that he has an obligation to give his speaking fees to his foundation? He has the right to profit from his brilliance, and his hard and selfless work. He is no longer President - we do not get to make further demands on his time or fortune. If and when he begins to say things in speeches that contradict the values he espoused your criticism would be justified.  Right now though you are just playing into the hands of those who want to distract us all from what is going on in the current administration. 
I have been a registered Democrat since my first time vote for JFK; I was in the Air Force at the time. I come from a solidly Democrat family that was active in politics. I never imagined that I would reach this point where I am ready to abandon the Democrats for their unrelenting corruption and ignoring what the rank and file want. If Sanders starts a third party I will join it. The United States is desperate for a new and untainted voice as the Democrat party has betrayed its working class roots and has become what Republicans were when I was younger; that is to say greedy and grasping. The Democrats certainly own a lion's share of the blame for Trump and his greedy cabinet and staff a true tragedy for what little is left of our democracy rapidly becoming an oligarchic police state.
I'm reserving judgment, until I see what he has in mind to do with the wealth he can accumulate.  I sympathize, but only in part.  He has earning power, and would be some kind of a fool not to use it.  But he supposedly set a higher standard.  In this instance, he appears to have gone low.  And the appearance is damaging.
I don't begrudge President Obama earning whatever he earns. He's worked hard and I appreciate all he's done for our country. I also was happy to see him get some great, much-needed R&amp;R. But I am having a hard time with this post-presidential Obama for this reason: ALL of us who voted for him are anxiety ridden and depressed. Some of us haven't had a decent night's sleep since early November. We've marched and made calls and written postcards and sent faxes to our representatives. We will continue to do so. We are engaged and we will resist Trump even as he seems intent on bringing the USA to her knees. We send money to democrats in races far from our own homes. Maybe we don't need Obama. BUT It's hard to see him behaving as if this transition is like any other. It's hard to see him glib and acting as if he's above the fray. It's hard to see that he is now not us, rather, he's now the 1% and seems to have forgotten the pain others fear of losing healthcare, being stopped by the police for playing in the street, of random deportation. The paid speeches are symbolic of something I'd refused to look at before this election--the Democratic Party is utterly out of touch with the needs of its citizens. I did not think Obama was too. Apparently I was wrong.
I suppose that what matters is the content of the speech. <br/><br/>When someone who is in office, running for office, plans to run for office accepts a huge fee to speak, the problem is quid pro quo. What does the price buy them? <br/><br/>For President Obama - who is not influencing current policy, not in the next few years at least - an expensive speech doesn't buy much. And one can believe that it is unlikely to be a fawning apologia of Wall Street.  <br/><br/>So what will Obama say, what will his tack be, what agenda will he be pushing when he addresses the very smart people of Wall Street? Frankly, I'd rather have them pay President Obama for insight into how to better shape themselves than have them pay Severn Bannon. <br/><br/>As angry as I am with the development in America of a new aristocracy, a class of wealthy people who believe that their wealth is based on God given merit, we need business. We need it less corrupt, more socially inclined and less tied up in amassing huge personal piles of assets that have been stripped like surface coal from everyone else.<br/><br/>If Obama can find in practical terms a way to demonstrate that having the wealth gap of a banana republic is bad for business, I'd try to find the $40K myself. 
Obama is a private citizen now, a former politician. We should be much more concerned about our current politicians and those seeking future public office. Why do our representatives spend over two-thirds of their time raising funds? Aren't American taxpayers paying their salaries and supplying them with overly generous benefits? Why are lobbyists writing bills? Who is being represented in Washington, and who is not? 
ENOUGH, please! Barack and Michelle Obama, as private citizens with a unique perspective on the world, are free to speak to whomever they wish, for whatever fee the market will bear. Sorry if it offends the delicate sensibilities of increasingly purity-minded Left. (And I say this as liberal Democrat.) Poverty does not inherently endow one with nobility; likewise, wealth does not inherently corrupt. <br/><br/>I'm more concerned with the current POTUS, who through his innumerable conflicts of interest, is enriching himself and his family WHILE IN OFFICE. With a possible tax reform bill coming, we should be reading editorials every day demanding Trump's tax returns to see EXACTLY how he and his businesses will benefit. 
The appearance of impropriety will surely come back to bite him.  With such lucrative book deals in place, and plenty of legitimate opportunities to earn money, it does seem the more prudent path would be to avoid cashing in on these ostentatious payouts.  
Mr. Obama's actions, unfortunately, drown out his words.  If his supporters excuse him for exploiting the presidency, then they lack any grounds on which to condemn Trump.  And no slick argument can elevate Obama's comments to an oration worth so much money.  Only a decision to donate the money to some charitable cause could acquit him of the just accusation of greed.<br/><br/>His book deal, on the other hand, leaves a different impression.  The publishers must make a profit to remain in business, and thus the contract reflects a gamble that enough people will buy the book to justify the advance.  The market determines the monetary value of publications, and consequently the publisher's offer, unlike the speech, arouses no suspicion of a payoff.  Mr. Obama will still parlay his presidency into a commercial bonanza, but at least he will earn the money.<br/><br/>I hope he finds the $400,000 fee for the speech worth the tarnish to his reputation.
It's not unheard of for athletes to hold out for a bigger payday even though their current contract may pay upwards of $20 - 25 million per year on a long-time basis. It begs the question, "when is enough, enough?" Will an additional $2 million per year change an athlete's lifestyle? I doubt it. So, should Obama expect, accept, a speaking fee upwards of $400,000; are his words, and historical significance worth that amount? Since he no longer is pushing the White House buttons of governing, and if someone is willing to pay him very big bucks for an insight into his eight years leading the nation, why not. But then again, "how much is enough?"
I can't imagine the amount agreed on for these speeches is not heavily brokered by a topnotch agent, who is looking to get his or her 15 or 20 percent of the fee. Good agents know what their clients are worth. No American who believes in Capitalism is going to throw up their hands and say, "No, please no, that's too much. You keep it. You can do more with it than I can." Having said this, I think it would benefit all Presidents, once they leave office, to announce, that while they will speak and receive huge fees, they will retain only 25% for themselves and donate the rest to a good cause. It's the kind of pledge that would gain some traction and approval among the people.
Not once in my 70 years, the last 50 of them being a liberal, has a condition of my support been a mediocre income. I'll never get a $400,000 speaking fee because I don't speak nearly as well as Mr. Obama and don't have that much interesting to say. I don't care what he makes...I care what he does and how he thinks. On those criteria alone, he would still get my vote.
How much is enough? We can ask this not only of Robber Barons, but of anyone. <br/><br/>At a certain point, after one's family becomes exempt from economic worry for generations, the accumulation of dollars becomes academic, if not unseemly. <br/><br/>Obama's speech for dough is a mistake because it is out of character.<br/><br/>He has exhibited blind spots before. He foolishly signed legislation permitting guns into our national parks, losing my vote.<br/><br/>Now he may be on the verge of losing my respect, for what's it worth.
Plants bend to available light. Politicians bend to available money. These are basic functions that sustain individual plants and politicians. The reason the politicians bend to wealthy donors has much to do with the Citizens United decision of the Supreme Court. Giving wealthy donors more speech than their lungs can project, we have handed our polity to the plutocrats. <br/><br/>We should not be surprised that political leaders seek out the wealthy before, during, and after they “serve” in office. 
The man was absent for eight years as an effective leader. When he did emerge, it was, inexplicably, to cave in to the Republicans on Social Security, Medicare, Bush's tax cuts, or caving to Wall Street. Did the Republicans block him at every turn? Of course. They saw a weak, lead-from-behind milquetoast in the oval office and were not intimidated in the least. In fact, they relished yanking his chain. Obama's response was more acquiescence and compromise. The Democratic Party under his leadership has abandoned their base and as a result, have been wiped out at every level of government. Taking $400,000 per speech is totally consistent with this guys morals. A the Democratic establishment still considers him a party leader. Sad.
This attitude seems to fall into the trap of false equivalence.  The purpose of these story lines is to inoculate Trump and other cronies from criticism of their truly dirty dealings.  Shame on the Times for playing into it.  Hillary has only herself to blame for not releasing her paid Wall Street speeches to the public.  There are very valid concerns around the interconnectedness of the moneyed elites who are able to attain access to the political class but we need to live in a world where all sides are held to the same standards.  Does President Obama owe the public any and all money that he receives due to his stature of having been president?  We certainly need to fight to even the political playing field but we need to do it through regulations, not public shaming.
I agree with this editorial.  The idea that other past presidents accept insane amounts of money from influential organizations/companies that put their financial interests before the best interests of the American people is a poor excuse for taking huge fees.  Saying I will have a foundation that will do good is not good enough either.  President Obama's most important gift to his followers is to show that he is above the fray--not just by refraining to speak against the grifter-in-chief but by modeling better behavior in this greed-filled universe.  I'm really disappointed--it's like a mask got pulled off. 
I am disappointed. And disgusted. Nearly a half of a million dollars for a speech to a Wall Street firm? I expected better of him, especially with the opposing rampant greed, worship and chaos of money by Trump and his administration.  If Barak and Michelle had not agreed to a 65 million dollar advance for books, I could understand charging such an exorbitant sum for a speech. <br/><br/>Of course, Obama is a private citizen now, albeit  a private citizen who is an ex-president with a legacy (which holds him to account to his erstwhile high flying rhetoric) and he is entitled to his decision to cop out to Wall Street.<br/><br/>It will be different, of course, if the money for this speech is invested in charities and/or his critical efforts to travel back to his roots and organize involvement of people, particularly young people, the millennials, the crucial next generation, for local, state and national politics. Included is his stated intentions to fight against gerrymandering and Citizen's United. <br/><br/>Otherwise, well, maybe bad timing and at the end of day, greed is good. I guess. 
Obama, nice man though he is, lacks courage. He allowed the country to be harmed by Trump, by refusing to tell us about Russian meddling.  His current cliches about youth and public service seem like bland cop outs, in the current climate of political threat. He had to stay non-threatening, as he obviously wanted to be unacceptable keynote speech person. Frankly, this consideration must have influenced his approach and policies. Yes, unfortunate. 
As unfortunate and dispiriting as the $400,000 speaking fee is, I am far more concerned with the fact that Mr. Obama is mis-reading the threats to our nation<br/>inherent in Trump and his administration. I think he underestimates those threats. We need his voice and leadership now, and it is not there. Is it too simplistic to say if you are not actively and consistently and vociferously resisting, then you are enabling? I don't think so. 
I really don't get - or just disagree with the complaints about Obama receiving  $400,000 for speaking to a collection of "Wall Streeters".  Why not?  If they want to pay him - no one even knows what he will say.  I believe this also reflects a naivety among my fellow Dems.  Sitting on our hands and tisking tisking about things we think soil us hasn't been working lately gang.  <br/><br/>Obama did his best to represent this country for 8 years &amp; much more importantly - he is a private citizen with great insight into the workings of Washington &amp; our economic realities - why wouldn't Wall Street be interested in hearing what he had to say?     Get over it - we need more articulate well informed leaders in our floundering Democratic Party.
I am in full agreement. My support for Mr. Obama was always unconditional, based on his integrity and how he carried himself while in office. However, I cannot understand why he would agree to give this type of speech. Maybe Mr. Obama is trying to tell us to grow up. Look out for ourselves and give up on the idea that an American leader might exist who cares about the public. After all, Mr. Trump is now the president of the United States. President Jimmy Carter might be an odd man out in all ways.
We have asked so much of this man. He and his family have served this nation faithfully as symbols of everything for which we stand as a country. Now we must trust this man to be guided by his conscience as a private citizen.
Mr. Obama is fully within his rights to extract the market value for speeches delivered by ex-leaders.  However, the fact that he chose to do so brazenly is surely disappointing for all those who believe he holds himself to a higher standard.
I find it amusing that people on here actually think people shell out all this money, to who ever the speaker is, for nothing more than the pleasure of their company and to hear their thoughtful words.....for on average 1/2 hour.  Ridiculous. They are either paying in advance for something they want or they are paying for something they all ready got....but it most certainly is a transaction and the speech hasn't got anything to do with it.
I believe it is President Obamas right to make well paid speeches and balance that with continued unpaid work for future leaders and a world in need.<br/>He gave his heart and soul for 8 years for our country for a miserable salary compared to corporate America.<br/>My concern is the obvious conflict of interest our current President has including enriching himself and his family with massive tax cuts.
Frankly I find all this overblown. I really don't care how much public figures in their post career periods are paid<br/><br/>A top flight baseball player gets over $150k per game. A top pitcher $700k per start<br/><br/>The question to me is whether Obama or the Clintons or Bush II made an impact on the folks they spoke before? Did they make them understand the issues, especially the issues these top 1% don't know or are exposed to?<br/><br/>If they do, then these speeches are worth every penny and more.
I cannot think of anyone better to "take" money from Wall Street than President Obama. At least he will likely do something good and positive with those funds while passing on a bit of his wisdom to the Wall Street elite who ARE completely out of touch with the rest of America and the world. Besides, it takes money to fight the moneyed interests. So the more money Obama can "take" from Wall Street, the better!<br/><br/>Republicans in touch with ordinary Americans? Perhaps "fake in-touch" but they could not care less about ordinary American, their health or their basic human and Constitutional rights. Democrats are indeed out of touch, but I see no reason to reach out to the small portion of deplorables out there that called for locking up their political opponents and worse. The rest should be easily reachable with common sense truths and arguments - tax cuts for billionaires to fix the deficit? What kind of fools do Republicans take them for? Throw 24 million Americans off of health coverage to give billionaires a tax cut? What kind of fools .... And so on.
The question that might be relevant to President Obama's acceptance of a large fee for sharing his thoughts is: what might he do with the money? That $400,000 (minus agent's fees and taxes, of course) just might end up becoming part of his much-discusssed initiative to seed the political fields with promising young candidates. Would that not be a worthy outcome? Or should he make his speech and ask for only $10,000? Or nothing? The organisers will surely not flinch if he came with no fee. I believe he's earned the trust of the people to do the right thing. Let the man live.
How can any President, including Obama, be critical of the elite who fund his or her very existence?  A moral choice indeed, which requires not an "audacity of hope" but more an "audacity of courage," and a more immediate "audacity of giving back" to the other 99 per cent.     
President Obama fought for the American people every day for eight years.  He conducted himself with grace, dignity and integrity against a Republican Party who vowed to oppose every proposal he put forth, regardless of the effect on the lives of the American people.  He and his family were disrespected and disparaged on a personal level unlike any previous President for showing up and doing what the American people expect.  And they never complained, publicly at least.  I,personally, was happy to see the joy of the burden of what they graciously bore removed, whoever they spent it with.  And I, personally, will not criticize immediately any means they have of continueing to serve the American people.
Coming on the heels of the $60 million book deals, Obama's acceptance of $400,000 for 90 minutes of speaking to a Wall Street firm is a betrayal of not only his own oft-stated values but also of the great majority of Democrats who favor tougher controls on the financial industry. At the least, it's certainly tone deaf from a man who blasted Citizen United in a State of the Union address and called income inequality "the defining challenge of our time." Republicans, of course, can more easily get away from this sort of thing because they make no bones about their belief that lining their pockets is their right and privilege as America's "makers." Even worse, Obama's speaking fee turns the spotlight back on his administration's failure to prosecute the Wall Street malefactors whose greed, lies and recklessness brought economic misery to millions of Americans. Voters are now entirely justified in thinking that, for all the noise about Dodd-Frank, Obama was in the pocket of Wall Street all along. This is a sellout and it's precisely what cost Democrats the election and gave us the Corrupter-in-Chief, Donald Trump.
Can anyone be that obtuse? The vast majority of politicians are not rich, the salaries are paltry, and the perquisites are under increasing scrutiny. Why would anyone put up with that kind of abuse if they could not cash in at some point?
Don't hold your breath while you're hoping.  Obama will grow further and further from the 99% as the lure of financial reward bekons.  Always remember, the life-style that he long ago chose to pursue  is extremely costly and cannot be paid for with Monopoly Money.  Realize too that  as an ex-President he no longer has the political instruments to make those effective changes he might once (maybe) have wanted.<br/><br/>As  President and the most powerful man on earth with a 365-day revolving Bully Pulpit, Obama did very little to provide  social safety nets for out-of-work coal miners, for struggling veterans, and frankly his final cave-in of not providing  single payer health care for over-worked and under-paid Americans showed exactly where his bird-bath deep concern for 99% was coming from.
Both parties are wrecked by big money. To be fair, so is the rest of the nation.<br/><br/>How many of us chumps would turn down $65 million?  I do with that President Obama had not. We need moral examples as much as moral leadership at the moment.
i think the Clintoniaztion of Obama's family is thankfully never going to happen.<br/><br/>Mr. Obama has set his own standard, and so i hope he will continue to do. What he will do with the money he very well deserves for his ability on delivering inspiring and deep speeches is businesses of mr. Obama himself.<br/><br/>From recent tax returns we did know that he has cut a part of his budget to charities and to the benefit of struggling people. There's no reason to think he will stop now as private citizen. So there's no need to reduce him to a fund-raiser as the Clintons are for their foundation. That's exactly  what he admonishes himself of in the piece reported in the article, to stay true to his values and to hold up his standards.<br/><br/>Alas, this also means that the new-puritanesim of the editorial board is out in the wild again looking for a steadily public figure to be its representant, an anti-Trump in flesh and blood to embolden this fantasy.<br/>Now, decency will call to stop being the accountant of mr. Obama, as private citizen, as much as of the members of mr. Trump family as well, with the righteous exclusion of the president himself, as public servant.
The problem I have with Obama cashing in specifically with a Wall Street firm is that no one of any significance was ever prosecuted after these greedy corporate financiers brought down the world economy.  <br/><br/>Obama has the right to accept speaking fees from any group, but doing business with Wall Street...seriously?  I grew up in an era in which presidents didn't 'cash in' on their connections.  It was thought to be unseemly, the same as lining your pockets.  <br/><br/>His decision makes my heart sink.  
Well I'm hoping he will donate the money. He may want to maximize the political impact of such a donation. This is a little tricky as he won't want to look as if he's responding to pressure, he'll want it to look like his own free choice. Of course I may just be a complete polly-anna. <br/><br/>President Obama, you can make me an astute commentator &amp; not a polly-anna. Please do the right thing!
Mr Obama is now a private citizen and is no longer able to directly influence public policy.  These paid speaking engagements represent no conflicts of interest and are within his right to make a legal living in the land of capitalism.  Comparing this with Hillary Clinton's speaking engagements is unfair since Mr Obama is not running for any sort of public office, whereby he may have been able to influence policy by accepting such monies.
I don't care if he speaks to the banks, as long as he speaks more to the rest of us. We need his voice, and his moral leadership, to rally the public and create at least a little restraint on the part of the Vandals who have sacked our capital.
Really? Former presidents aren't supposed to be paid for their work and if they are, they're betraying some ideal in the country?  The solemnity with which this editorial intones its dismay is almost funny, if it weren't so legitimately sad.  Thanks for giving the current administration some false equivalency fodder re nepotism and profiting from being in power. You know they'll twist this.
I held my nose when I voted for Clinton precisely because of her speaking fees.   This is even worse given the frightening state of the country now.   <br/><br/>If Mr. Obama thought he could be any kind of leader in future, forget it.  His tone deafness in office contributed to the rise of Trump imo. Obviously he STILL doesn't 'get it'.   
Sen. Sanders on CNN called Obama's paid Wall Street speech 'distasteful', Sen. Warren also said Obama’s decision on the speech ‘"troubled" her.<br/>His fee is much more than Hillary got. <br/><br/>Obama wears a halo compared to the guy now in his office. He’ll always look good vs Trump, and it will be hard to evaluate him objectively for some time.<br/>But this is the president who preserved high insurance profits for ACA and never prosecuted bankers who crashed the economy.<br/><br/>Jimmy Carter recently called our election financing legalized bribery, unlike what he experienced in the ‘70s.  Says now we veer toward oligarchy because of multi millions needed to run for office. <br/><br/>So the corporations and ultra rich aren’t just buying off our office holders, they’re also setting norms for both parties, for candidates and media. How do they define left, right, center now?   How to define ‘bribery’ and ‘influence’? <br/><br/>Turning over our elections to the rich for sponsorship means they call the shots---can’t be otherwise. Laws passed by congress will never disadvantage the 1 percent. How will  this attract politicians with a duty to we the people?  <br/><br/>The 1st priority is campaign finance reform. Then start the process of taking back our democracy from the elites who swim in the swamp with lawmakers &amp; lobbyists. They are setting norms for those aspiring to office, and those leaving office. These norms will always hurt the 99 percent. 
Book Deals are one thing but taking 400K from a Wall Street firm seemingly starts President Obama  down the road of Bill Clinton's post presidency when I'd SO HOPED he'd steer closer to President Carter's. But I guess I shouldn't be surprised that he'd be speaking to Wall Street when his administration didn't pursue any criminal prosecutions for what Wall Street &amp; the Banks did to OUR Country &amp; the World n 2008. <br/><br/>So I guess this would also probably mean President Obama won't be supporting the Majority of Democrats in the House who are looking to have Medicare cover Everyone in OUR Country. I had hoped President Obama now that he was out of office &amp; Hilary wasn't elected might've stood with Bernie &amp; brought the Democratic Party back to their Best Days of the LBJ &amp; FDR administrations when they were out to help the Poor &amp; enlarge the Middle Class which has been under attack since the Reagan administration. President Obama is a tough person to dislike but so far in his brief tenure as a former president I can't say much for his Actions.  
The real question isn't what Mr. Obama is paid to give a speech to a Wall St. firm.  The real question is:  what will be in the speech?  Will he encourage Wall St. to be better corporate citizens and friendlier to Main St.?  Or, will he avoid biting the hand that is feeding him the 400 grand?<br/><br/>If Mr. Obama makes 400 grand and changes a few minds on Wall St. for the better, then the 400 grand is worth it.
It's disappointing that Barak hasn't said more.<br/>I'm sure he needs a break now, but eventually duty will summon him to rejoin the fight.
It's not exactly true that all past president's since Ford have given buck-raking speeches.  Ronald Reagan did not, and both George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush minimized it.<br/><br/>The Clinton's shamelessly monetized "public service" to make a billion dollar empire.  By comparison, all others are pikers.  Still, it is disappointing to see Obama not only raking in the bucks, but doing it so soon after leaving office.
Honestly, from the comments, I feel I must be the last american left not to have a problem with this. I didn't have a problem with Clinton. I don't have a problem with Obama. I'm not sure why these very public figures who are suddenly deprived of a foreseeable paycheck should be subject to such vitriol for making money in the only way our culture opens up to them. The editorial seems to suggest that the book deal alone should float the Obamas for... forever, perhaps? But as anyone whose income has relied on publishers already knows, there's no guarantee that the money is forthcoming on such deals; it can be years between the signed contract and the actual, incremental payouts. At any rate, accepting a hefty speaker's fee says nothing about one's political stances and platforms, Clinton had the most liberal, progressive platform ever advanced, thanks to Sanders' push from the left, yet this whole 'scandal' around speakers' fees seemed to suggest she was secretly somehow more wedded to moneyed interests than Trump. How ridiculous. Yet people fell for that. And now here comes the Times, with the same purist propaganda aimed to undermine the left by undermining in advance whatever initiatives the Obamas might try to start. You think they and we would have learned better by now. 
Who yet knows what Mr. Obama will share with the wealthy Wall Street crowd? They are the group that most needs to hear from Barack and it is the audacity of his aspiration that he might just influence some of them to share their wealth as he so generously shares his life for the benefit of all, our whole society, not just themselves or a few. I applaud his decision AND I'd like to read the transcript of what he shares with them.
I'm sorry, Obama gave part of his life, prime years, to the service of his country. He led with heart and made tough decisions, thoroughly considered. I was proud to have him as a leader.<br/>He deserves every penny he gets post presidency. If he decides to contribute some of these funds to his foundation or other causes, great, if not I think he can still look at himself in the mirror and hold his head up high.<br/>The phrase 'we don't know what we got till its gone' is operative here.
If the American people truly want to keep their ex-Presidents from the appearance of favoring special interests the American people should pay them what they're worth after leaving office.  We elevate a person to hold arguably the most important job in the history of the world, one in which only 45 people have ever held, and then we expect that person to essentially lie down between the pages of a history book when it's over.   We don't pay our ex-Presidents enough to own their lives when we're finished with them.
Why is that it is always the Democratic politicians are the ones who should help set the standard?  I guess we have given up any hope that a Republicans will ever do the right thing?
But...In office, President Obama offered the House republicans a "deal" where Obama offered a large cut in Soc Security (chained CPI)<br/>He also failed, for 8 long years, to use the bully pulpit to talk about how important soc sec is, and how it needs to be expanded<br/>So , he may appear liberal compared to the House "freedom" caucus, but I don't think he is truly liberal.
President Obama is now a private citizen.  What he does with his time is his business.  What private companies choose to pay him is their business.  As long as he follows the law, I say more power to him.
I don't believe that the Democratic Party has lost touch.  I think my party has become complacent.  Other than Senator Warren and Sanders and a few House Members, Congressional Democrats are no where to be found.  Where are their voices.<br/><br/>I generally like President Obama but his health care bill helped in destroying my party.  President Obama entered office with a super majority in the Senate and a majority in the house.  Republicans pounded Democrats for the new health care law which cost my party both houses of congress, state houses and senates, and governorship. Plus, Republicans used their new majorities in state houses to gerrymander the voting districts preventing Democrats from ever having a majority in the House.   All because of Obama Care.<br/><br/>Was it really worth it? <br/><br/>I read years ago that for those participating in Obama Care, only 1% actually vote.  <br/><br/>Was it worth it?<br/><br/>Mr. Obama needs to focus on something other than politics.  <br/><br/>Pick up where Dr. King left off!!!
you complain about Obama's "tone deafness" for not being attuned to the "resentments of the 99%". Have y been watching the recent Trump rallies? That solid 40+% majority isn't resentful of billionaires. It is resentful of the media, especially when the media won't toe the line of the "alternative truths". I only wish there were 99% of Americans  resentful of the one percenter!
Give the guy a break. He has a lot to say to the wealthy that may help them to understand that income equality is destroying our country.  I would say job well done if that comes to pass.  
They don't need the money, it sends a bad message (that the ultimate end of public office is personal enrichment), and tarnishes his image.  He absolutely should donate all of his funds, from all of his speeches, to charity.
Let the man put away what he can, he earned it. He doesn't owe us anything anymore. I'm happy with the eight years he gave us. 
I was very proud to vote for Obama and felt the message he brought to the national conscience might somehow be truly different.  It appears though, like the Clintons and so many ex-Washington others, he will succumb to the draw of wealth. To me it is hypocrisy and fuel for liberal detractors. It would seem then that there is "great wealth in poverty", only not in the meaning that should be.
  He served well and long, now wearing the gray hair that comes with taking that job seriously.   He is a great man and as long as he isn't using his influence because he is being paid, and since there was never any sign during his presidency that he was teeing up a pay off , let him alone to make money and enjoy the life he well deserves.<br/>   Any comparison to him and what some Republicans may have done is just terrible.
We are complaining about Barack Obama's speaking fee when the Trump family is using the White House for free advertising for their brand?  $400K is nothing compared to the profit Ivanka stands to make with her copyright deal in China.<br/><br/>Yes, I know that everyone feels that Obama should be "better" than this and I agree that it feels dirty.  But, my goodness, the fellow is sainthood material compared to what has been in the White House for 102 days.  <br/><br/>And as the parent of a current college freshman, $400K goes a long way to cover 8 years of college tuition.
For ten years President Obama has endured some of the most awful criticism of a future, current and now past president I can recall. Studies show the presidency ages you at an enhanced rate because of the stress.<br/>I would like for Mr Obama to share the text of his talk because I find his thoughts on the matter of Wall St vs Main St and Jaime Dimon's life vs my life, interesting. <br/><br/>But I would really like this very critical, ungrateful, undereducated nation to leave him and his family in peace, and focus on the current President whose policies as stated will bankrupt al 98%'ers over 45, and end the hopes of upward mobility of those under 45. That's is, if we live through the next week of Kim Jong Un vs Trump-WWE edition.
Where is the outrage about Trump and family cashing in daily while in possession of the Oval Office?  From Conway going on tv and telling people to "buy Ivanka's stuff", to the clearly illegal lease Trump still holds on the Washington hotel and the use of his swampland resort in Florida for "working weekends", this so-called President blatantly rings the cash register every day.<br/>The list goes on. <br/><br/>President Obama will undoubtedly make some money as an former president should. <br/><br/>I am far more concerned about tax policy being twisted to benefit the current president than I am about speaking fees by our former president. 
This is not surprising.  The single most important activity in the United States is the pursuit and acquisition of money.  This pursuit marginalizes everything else whether it be family, church, ethics, culture, friendship etc.  Indeed, the real American ethos is "Friendship is fine but business is business." instead of "Business is fine but friendship is friendship."  In the United States there are no countervailing forces that can compete and rein in our "Culture of Money".  Thus we are not quite a national community but rather our bond and kinship is economic led by the embodiment of expensive bad taste and the acolytes of the temples of gold.   We have become the world that George Bailey saw when he wished he was never born in the film "Its a Wonderful Life"  whose maxim is the title of the W.C. Fields film "Never Give a Sucker an Even Break."  And while we rail against the 1% we lose sight of the fact that the other 99% want what the 1% have.  In fact it is the 99% that gave birth to the 1%.  In America everyone "cashes in".  Why should President Obama be any different?  Perhaps the money will allow him to pursue his public policy and political without having to worry where about his next egg salad sandwich is coming from.
Obama, for all the good things he brought to a disgraced office, failed to hold Wall Street accountable for rampant and pervasive greed and financial crimes. Despite his expressions of pipulist empathy for foreclosed and suffering regular citizens he provided lucrative bailours for Wall Street and bonuses were lavish for the actual perpetrators of the economic meltdown.<br/><br/>So all the rationalizations posted here notwithstanding, taking huge speaking payments looks very much like casing in on deferred payment for services rendered. Any ethical high ground he may have deserved going forward has neen yoelded and his guture entreaties to young people will ring a little hollow.<br/><br/>With tens, maybe hundreds of millions in net worth and a 1% future to enjoy,  It's not like he needed the money...unless the Wall Street ethos of "never enough" is even his. But he was supposed to be different. 
I wonder how many Times readers would turn down the opportunity to earn $400,000 by giving a speech.<br/>I wonder how many Times readers would pass on the opportunity to give a heartfelt message to a large group of influential people.<br/>If Mr. Obama gives this audience the chastening they deserve, and don't want to hear, it may be the last speech he is paid to deliver...
While I would prefer that President Obama be totally altruistic, the reality is that he has a right to speak to whomever he wants and I believe his message will not change depending on who he is speaking to. Unlike other, less sincere and capable representatives, Mr. Obama will be true to his beliefs. If having sufficient funds to contribute to worthy causes helps him to get things done that he feels is important to the future of our democracy, then so be it. <br/><br/>The one thing I believe about the Obamas is that they truly care about others...less advantaged people. For them, power and money are not ends in themselves as they are for the Groper, but means to the end of helping those less fortunate and and in despair. President Obama will spend the remainder of his time on earth doing good for as many people as possible and taking a few hundred thousand dollars a speech will not change the quality of the man. I really do not think he will tell those paying him what they want to hear, but rather, encourage them to a life of giving, to seeing others in a way they might not have seen others before. I know that sounds "pie in the sky", but, given what is happening in this country right now, I am choosing to have faith in a person I have long admired and who I believe will not disappoint me.  
Money is power, and everything and everybody pays a price, whether to be bought or sold.  If Obama is to have access to the 1%, he absolutely needs a personal war chest to sustain a important anti-Trump political effort or he'll have to go to work, and entirely disappear in the United States of Amnesia.  
A “Say it ain’t so, Joe” moment for many of us. I guess these are the gratuities earned, for all the Banksters who never went to jail, for the lavish lifestyles preserved by the bailouts, for that ever-thickening layer of dust on our anti-trust laws. What a shame. Makes all the dignity and grace seem like a put-on. I’m disappointed, unless all this money ends up funding scholarships or otherwise doing good works. This is not a double standard in my mind, because I thought better of him. I had thought he was a better person than his peers.
Before anyone on the left jumps on Obama for taking a big speech fee from a bank, can't we wait to see what he says and does? If he takes 500,000 from a bank, harshly criticizes bankers on bad stuff they do and challenges them to do better, then gives 35% to the public in taxes and the balance to a charity (thus essentially transferring wealth from those that have it to those that don't), why would anyone have anything to complain about?
Our country needs former President Obama to speak out loudly about the destructive path of the current administration and its cynical efforts to roll back Obama's achievements. Instead we are left deeply disappointed with his silence.  It lends the appearance of a President, who gave us a scandal-free and honest 8 years, no longer cares about the country anymore.
If the Democratic Party is to escape its doldrums, we need people to speak out on the issues of the day and provide leadership. We are struggling with an incompetent, self-centered president who spouts the most untrue and counterproductive stances. We need people to speak out against those ill-considered "policy" directions.  But Obama stays silent. He does not want to join the fray. Now he wants to speak only at closed door meetings with Wall Street types and collect extraordinary fees for doing so. That is not the leadership the Democratic Party desperately needs. Obama makes himself irrelevant if he joins the Clinton speech-o-rama party and caters to the 1% while saying nothing to help the 99%.
Individualism is a strength of America. President Obama did the best job he could and tried to lift as many as possible. I hope he makes a ton of money because I am confident he knows he can still be a good person doing it.  He will do good things with his money, aligned with his values.  President Obama is a good individual; he is not perfect. The Progressives and Socialist Democrats often remind me of China's "Thought Reform Movement," of the 1950s. They really are beating these drums of purity tests etc. All the corruption and collusion they fear from wealthy people only takes new form in PURE Communist and Socialist Regimes.<br/>We need to get back to the American Spirit of using the best ideas from around the world including components of Socialism etc.<br/>When I was a trade worker in a trade Union the President retired and his son was popped right into Union Office (=  2 pensions). Then my Business Agent retired and his brother was popped right into his spot as Business Agent (= 2 Pensions). Shortly after that brother became a Business Agent, his own son was brought into the Union and was allowed to bypass the formal Union apprenticeship and so without delay was earning the full rate of pay at work. So you can't sell me on an American brand of Socialism. It's full of greedy and corrupt people at the bottom too. The world is full of good people too. 
The author of this piece misses the point.  The quote from Obama's book shows why he needed to raise money for campaigns and his unease at associating with those who had it.  To then conclude that accepting money after his need for campaign donations is somehow a betrayal of principles is absurd. <br/><br/>Liberals love telling others what do to with their money, and this is more advice in that vein.
Money is power in our society, and until that changes the last thing Obama should do is disempower himself. As others have said, it's what causes he supports that matters, not how much money he receives for doing it. If only everyone working for good was amply rewarded for it, we'd be living in a better world.
I knocked on doors, donated, voted for him twice.  With this decision, he loses all credibility with me.  And the progressives who are defending him sound very much like Trump supporters, unwilling to criticize their guy no matter what he does.  
It is intellectual confusion that pretends Obama is not true to his principles by accepting 400K for a speech. There is a market in which his speeches are worth money. Not to respect that market and not take what others do would be simple minded. That does not, I repeat NOT, mean that he has swiveled his attention away from those in need.<br/>Edouard Prisse, the Netherlands
Some commenters are defending President Obama's very poor decision based on their claim, probably true that the Times had little criticism for Hillary Clinton for her Wall Street speeches or the other presidents who have cashed in. Certainly the one comment on Dick Cheney and his Haliburton ties was dead on. Would  be the worst ever if Trump had not become president.<br/><br/>How did that happen? Russians helped and the Comey letter was probably unfair but Ms Clinton deserves much of the blame herself. The public did not react well to her Wall Street speeches, they cemented the idea that democrats like her only care about the middle class and the working class on election day. Maybe that is not true but the perception is there. Nobody wants to vote for a party that tells you that you can hear about their compassion for you for a fee of $250,000.<br/><br/>And it is unseemly. Jimmy Carter led the way and nobody followed. There is still time for Barack Obama to be who he promised he was. If this continues every accusation that Trump is benefiting financially will fall on deaf ears with certain voters. Obama should set a higher standard. It is more important now than when he took office.
So what are the banksters getting for their 400K? Perhaps just a bit  of satisfaction in showing that Obama has his price--and it's really not so high. It will no doubt cost him much more in the long run, however. Another bonus.. 
Barack Obama us cashing in on his rock star status among a sizable number of Americans and making hay while the sun shines. Its not illegal but it seems hypocritical for a card carrying democrat trying to overlook the criticism of Hillary Clinton by Sanders for precisely similar exorbitantly paid speeches which people wonder about, in terms of what pearls of wisdom will he be secretly sharing. If any one thought the presidential salary over 8 years followed by a life long lucrative pension and royalties would be adequate for a decent living, think again, we are a capitalist country and even if Obama allegedly may have been called by his critics, a socialist president, the socialism does not apply to him it is for the average Americans. I will let this pass unless someone can convince us that this was a pay back for what he did in office for which he is collecting a reward. 
The former president does appear to be cashing in, but I will withhold judgement until I see how he spends it.  If, as he says, he will fight the voter registration scam that GOP is bent on promoting, he'll need a lot of money to fight off the deep pockets of dark money of the Kochs,the Mercers and the rest of those rogues.  He and Eric Holder want to fight the gerrymandering that the GOP has put in place so that they are guaranteed a majority in Congress and the Court.  The GOP has always won by cheating.  Let's see what President Obama does with his big payoff to level the field.
Has President Obama made it clear that he will NOT donate any or all of his speaking fees to his foundation and other like-minded charities?  Until he does, and given his and Michelle's understated grace and humility while in office, I for one won't automatically assume that he will betray his previous altruistic sentiments.
We all know by now that Democrats and particularly minorities and women (redundant) are held to a different standard, especially when it comes to making money.   I have found myself struggling with the former President's ease in entering a world he once recognized as being shallow and deeply flawed, but let's face it, he had already entered that world when he wrote that book and without Wall Street and the super rich like Oprah Winfrey he would not have been elected President in the first place.  Take a look back at his first cabinet members; Geithner, et, al -- the very people who contributed to the "fall" in the first place. Mr. Obama was such a wonderful President for this country -- steady, strong and classy -- I will always be grateful for that, especially now that we have this unethical, every kind of phobic person you can think of in the WH, but Mr. Obama should try to rise above it and really examine his part in Mrs. Clinton not winning this election.  His ego-driven display on the campaign trail when he constantly talked about his legacy, solidifying in people's mind that Mrs. Clinton would simply be a third term for him.  This was a huge factor in Mrs. Clinton's loss (history, I believe will reflect this).  So, Mrs. Clinton, who would likely have been one of our better Presidents is now shunned as the biggest loser of all time and Mr. Trump and Mr. Obama are cashing in.  Mrs. Clinton will certainly survive this, but will we -- that's the real question?
Why should President Obama not take every penny Wall Street is prepared to offer? At least the money will go toward educating Wall Streeters about the values that Mr. Obama represents (and that they seldom do). Given their tendency to stick together at all times, it may be one of the few opportunities these predators have to hear any thoughtful, articulate criticism/analysis of their unconscionable behavior toward the "average American".<br/><br/>I don't fault ex-presidents of any party for having taken advantage of Wall Street's largesse, and I won't fault President Obama. Why is it OK for actors. writers, or office workers to seek the highest possible wage, but it's not OK for former office-holders to accept what's offered them by companies with too much money to spend? This man - like many office-holders - served 24/7 throughout his time in office, and he deserves whatever anyone is prepared to pay to hear his viewpoints.<br/><br/>Given that the current occupant of the White House (who's busy eating chocolate cake, playing golf, and threatening nuclear war) ranted and raved against Sec'y Clinton's allegedly cozy relationship with Wall Street, only to fill his cabinet with billionaires from Goldman Sachs and the like, I hardly think it's fitting for anyone at this juncture to pretend it makes a scintilla of difference who gets paid what or by whom - as long as it isn't by a foreign government for activities involving our national security or opening the recipient to potential blackmail.
Those are $400k that are now going to be taxed. Left with WS, the cash would have been in accessible to govt coffers. More importantly, a former prez is not a public figure and as a private citizen must do what he can to make an honest fortune. Furthermore, it's curious how celebrity journalists and TV commentators, who rake in millions for doing a job that is hardly the most intellectually or physically demanding, can criticize a former prez for what he receives as a paycheck. Finally, this faux outrage and false equivalence only serves to deflect from that in the White House where the current prez, his family and cabinet are fleecing the country to the tune of millions! 
It's worse than you think.  Obama went into the Senate and presidency with money and power on his mind. And now he has it. He accepted donations from the oligarchy and did their bidding.  He also accepted my 25 dollar donation and did not do my bidding, to do his job like the liberal he claimed to be.<br/><br/>Any American that does not realize democracy is dead in America is asleep. The 1% control everything. They have the resources to never let down their control.  The citizen has no resources to fight the 1% and must surrender to that power.<br/><br/>At my retirement, having learned what America had become during my lifetime, I became an expatriate 14 years ago to a control that still extends services to the individual and believes that people still have a right to a decent life.<br/><br/>The election of Trump is the crowning achievement of capitalism's victory over America and over democracy.  Democracy is gone and elections are a fantasy of magical thinking!
To many of us, Obama failed to take Wall Street to task for their illegal and immoral behavior leading up to one of the most devastating economic crisis of the past 100 years.  Almost no one served jail time.  Fines were a drop in the bucket. Now we're about to return to the same lack of oversight that led to the crisis in the first place.  So yes, Obama's acceptance of this much money makes one wonder about his motives and actions regarding Wall Street during his time in the White House.
I feel that the money Obama is accepting from Wall Street will be considered as payment for a job well done, in Wall Street's estimation, of first bailing the banks out, and then in keeping their guilty CEO's out of jail. <br/><br/>Once again we see that it's business as usual in Washington, and a complete flub of the golden opportunity that Trump and his swamp creatures are giving the Democrats to take the moral high ground and create a government once again for the people. <br/><br/>Obama had the honor/curse of breaking the White House color barrier. He certainly paid for it with the heaps of abuse he got. However strong my admiration for him is (and I admire few men more), learning that Obama is taking Wall Street money is like learning that Jackie Robinson took steroids. <br/><br/>Somehow there has to be a political party to come along and do what's right. Can it be done? Maybe America's moral fabric is so threadbare that it can no longer be stitched up. Cheating seems to be the way to go these days. From pitchers, to preachers, to police, to presidents....cheat...cheat....cheat. 
In the lens of the present, the optics are not great. However, why should it matter? Your editorial is a simplistic expression of disappointment rather than a documentation of legal, moral or ethical failure. <br/><br/>However, ask yourself why you are disappointed. You expected better or somehow President Obama was supposed to be different? President Obama and other past Presidents, present company excepted, did not for office with lure of a guaranteed of a windfall down the road as their primary motivation. I presume that they ran because of a belief in a greater good; whether I believe in their interpretation of that or not.<br/><br/>Accepting a fee for rendering a service, unless illegal, is not a crime. Moreover, we should not cherry pick who we hold to a higher standard. Doing so is the height of hypocrisy. If Presidents Obama and Bush want to give paid speeches, they need only answer to their consciences, not mine. They have violated no law nor ethical or moral code.
This may be the operative phrase, "every former president but Jimmy Carter has supped often at the corporate table."  Isn't it interesting that the poster boy of bad presidents is the one who won't sell out.  Certainly makes one wonder if Carter wasn't actually the best president in recent history.  All the others have been corporate stooges.  
I have read this criticism in a few places now.<br/><br/>Has anyone wondered what Mr. Obama is going to do with the money?  Is it for his foundation?  For charity?  Will it subsidize other speeches for groups that cannot pay?<br/><br/>And why should he NOT charge Cantor-Fitzgerald a bundle?  Why should they not pay more?  We know they make more, have more.
Perhaps President Obama WILL give the lion's share of his speaking fees and book royalties to charitable causes. I have seen no indication that he intends not to do so. Did I miss the memo? Are we being too quick to judge? 
Maybe it matters what he does with the money. A lot of good needs to be done in this world, some of which requires resources. <br/><br/>I trust the man.
If Bernie didn't have the speeches to hang Hillary with, what would he have used?  His 4 slogans and a stump speech repeated a thousand times?  His crazy promises that he would turn McConnell and the entire Republican Congress around 180 by using the bully pulpit?  His ability to turn any question into an answer from his talking points, no matter how unrelated.  His ridiculous math that makes Trump's trickle down look almost sane? The hypocrisy of this demagogue who would not release his tax returns!   The speech "scandal" was all innuendo, and Bernie should be ashamed.   He and his low information voters who withheld their Hillary votes gave us Trump. <br/><br/>Obama and his family endured years of persecution.  For me, if they want to cash in, fine. We elect human beings, not saints. Clinton and Obama had no family money.  They grew up knowing what it is like to be poor.  If someone is waiving money at them, and they know they are not being bought, what is the issue?   This is an issue because this attack was a way that Bernie saw a win. 
I don't begrudge President Obama accepting a $300,000 speaking fee. There's nothing about it that smells of quid pro quo, just like there were no scandals in his two terms as President. He served two terms with dignity. 
I was a bit disappointed but not terribly surprised that President Obama would hit the big bucks speaking circuit after his presidency was over.  <br/><br/>Wall Street may have grumbled about his populist rhetoric but on the whole he was really quite good to them.  Not a single bankster was prosecuted under his watch.  Under the Obama administration, Instead of a march of Wall Street wheelers and dealers straight into court and then into the Federal prison system, the big boys paid fines (aka the cost of doing business) and carried on as usual.<br/>Even if he, as we used to say in a more innoent time, uses the speech to "speak truth to power" they will simply brush his comments off,  He is after all nothing but a paid performer.<br/><br/>Sorry, Barak, I used to think better of you.
It's what he says that matters.  $400K would be well spent if he would tell Wall Street to knock it off, start acting like a member of the greater community, end the pathological greed, dirty tricks, and outright fraud, and start behaving like responsible citizens of the world, connected to everyone, not just their 1% (I'm reminded of that obnoxious sign in the window above the "Occupy Wall Street" protests, "We Are the 1%."  <br/><br/>Wall Street needs a dressing down, not more ego massaging.  Unfortunately, I don't hold much audacity of hope that Obama will say the above.  I have only audacity of contempt for the greed and insular culture that oozes from Wall Street.
There is nothing wrong going on, and it's not immoral.  President Obama has every right to legally earn as much as the market will bear.  
I agree. This speech is the first time I've doubted President Obama's integrity. 
Most Americans have figured out that he is not special. In fact, he is very much a stereotypical democrat along the likes of Pelosi (voracious money raiser, few principles). In retrospect, he makes G.W. Bush look ever more graceful and classy.
I was a critic of Obama from the Left but I find this a non-issue.  It has to be.  All eyes on Trump.  There remains so many unanswered and troubling questions about Trumps financials that major print media have not explored.  Where is the possible $50 million in excess of cost received by the Trump inaugural find?   How have the Trump visits impacted Mar-a-Lago's bottom line?  Was MAL profitable prior to the visits?  How often did Trump golf prior to becoming president?  <br/><br/>Moreover, it strikes me as the height of unfairness to criticize Obama for what he is doing out of office while there's little defense of what Obama did in office.  
Circumstances cry out for mold-breaking leadership....a vision that sharply contrasts with to the blizzard of corruption from the Republicans. I love Obama, but a great opportunity has been missed. 
RE: "every former president but Jimmy Carter has supped often at the corporate table."<br/><br/>I would dare say that many of the NY Times subscribers sup at the corporate table as well as we depend on them for our paychecks. Does that make us terrible people as well? Or does the smaller amounts paid to most of us make the difference in moral superiority? <br/><br/>And I've never understood how accepting payments for a speech from corporations is worse than actually being the corporate interest itself - i.e., Trump &amp; Co.  I guess there is always some doubt about the payee's supposed willingness to do deeds for the corporate interest, but there is no doubt that the corporate interest, when in charge, will do it's own bidding. 
I don't think Obama was drawn to politics for the same reasons as a Bernie Sanders or a Paul Wellstone.  Don't get me wrong---he was a good president and very likable.  But Obama and the Clintons never got it.  Excess money is the problem.  It is addictive and more importantly it is the basis of our empty culture, and tragically ironic in the homeland of Christendom.  It dominates our material lives so much that we even choose selfish gold-brocaded leaders.  We protect wealth when we should be protectors of the earth and its other inhabitants.
What a disappointment. I was under the illusion that Obama was a highly ethical person. Money corrupts even more than power, I guess.
Everyone has the audacity to earn an income. It is even more audacious to hope we will have leaders who can govern as they preach. Both parties, democrat and republican, and all those in  other camps, do not have any public service spirit anymore. Their political offfice has become a stepping stone to their own  financial security and  not to provide for the general  public who have elected. them. Voters, face reality.
A pension of 4$00K is insufficient to live comfortably?  Does Obama not see that actions like this convert the young and dispossessed from hope to cynicism?  Meet the new (ex)boss.... same as the old (ex)boss.
The most good can be done with the most money. Let's see what he does with the money before making judgments.<br/><br/>Follow the good!
How much is enough? Is there no answer to this question? I have no problem with Mr. Obama speaking to the enemy, why can't he refuse being paid for it, or at least make them give it to an opposing entity, even more painful. Why has a modest lifestyle become something to scorn. Celebrity worship is one of the most destructive parts of our loss of community. When are we going to learn that less is more, that less for those that have much is more for those who have little.
There are two kinds of filthy rich. Those who put their name tag on gifts to the poor and those who believe that the market will redistribute wealth.<br/> In short, there are the direct donors and the proud capitalists. One group funds Democrats. One group funds Republicans. They have a lot more in common with each other than with you and me.
Our political system has become a system of legalized bribery.<br/>People like Dick Cheney go back and forth between government, where they award giant contracts to global corporations, and those same global corporations, receiving giant compensation packages, then go back to government again to do them more favors.<br/>The Clintons deregulated the financial industry, helping billionaires make billions more at our expense, Now the same people give her millions, just to hear her talk? I don't believe it. These people don't become billionaires by giving away millions for nothing. She even reassured them, in secret, that she has "public policies and private policies," wink wink, nod nod.<br/>Holding Democrats to the same lax standards republicans use, because it's your team, leaves the people unable to trust you.<br/>Obama signed on to the Bush bailouts, made a bailout plan for homeowners that was used to steal more homes than it saved, expanded privatization of government functions, weakened the Bill of Rights, and tried to send more of our sovereignty to international tribunals run by for and of global corporations, via TPP.<br/>If you excuse Obama getting $400,000 per speech when he leaves office, what standard will you use to criticize Trump when he collects $4,000,000 per speech.<br/>We need a political revolution, not republican lite hypocrisy.
No one, including Jesus of Nazareth, has anything valuable enough to say in 20 minutes to be worth $400,000.  As with Ms. Clinton, something else is going on here.<br/><br/>Obviously it is the sale of influence. Only a lunatic would say that because Mr. Obama will not run for office personally again that he has no influence over the people to whom he is connected.  The people paying that kind of money for what will certainly turn out to be the most banal of speeches are buying influence and connections, and he is selling them.<br/><br/>He should be ashamed of himself, but I doubt that he is.  He has provided handsomely for his family already, but greed has no limits, and there is always the desire for more.  <br/><br/>What Mr. Schultz is saying is sadly true. President Obama "will be true to he values, his vision, and his record" by giving such speeches and pocketing the bribes.
Horrible article.  Let the man make some money.  Plain and simple.  Why foresee doom and ethical collapse because he gets paid to talk with people interested in hearing his philosophy.  Of all his potential audiences, some, like Wall Street, may gain from his ethical example.  Should he pay them to talk to them?  Please.  
It seems to me to be the kind of limo liberal action that got DJT elected. I hope President Obama reflects his new role beyond hopeful platitudes dished up to those who have more than plenty. DNC has not changed. It is still Rockefeller in Democrat clothing. I believe President Obama can help change that shape and sound to progressive largeness of thought and action. Pax, jb 
Obama "wrestled with what it means to be a representative public servant in an era of purchased influence".<br/><br/>Can anyone even _imagine_ Trump having that problem? <br/><br/>Trump is already busily monetizing the presidency and raking it in, driving coach and horses through nepotism rules, emoluments clauses and ethics. He doesn't care what it means. He just cares how much he can get.
Obama no longer has lobby-worthy political influence to sell, he no longer proposes or executes legislation, and he doesn't owe it to the Democratic Party to turn down lucrative speaking offers. This editorial sounds more like Hillary-bashing than Obama bashing, and it falls prey to the "You must donate your influence to my preferred movement" fallacy.
He's more than merely a good man. He's the finest President we've had in many years. He still is that man, and he and his will remain so even in the unrelenting gaze of those Rightist critics who are determined to dent his greatness and badger his family for the rest of their lives. If there's any in this nation who deserve privacy and relief from the fawning and taunts they will face it is his children and Mrs. Obama, too.<br/>Not a few OpEd writers have gone on to capitalize on their fame by association with the great New York Times themselves.<br/>Give the guy and his fame a break.<br/>Thank you, President Obama for your unrelenting efforts in behalf of the common American and the ordinary work-a-day citizen.<br/>Bless him and his. May they all be as fine.
I can't help but be reminded of all those thieves in suits still walking around free after they crashed the world economy....<br/><br/>It's not a good memory and unfortunately it's shared by millions of Americans.<br/>Perception is everything.
This editorial is depressing and wrong-headed.  Yes, Mr. Obama:  Give speeches and accept big money.  You will need all the help you can get to continue your message that the concentration of national income among the super rich, which will likely will never describe your income (and wealth), should be sharply curtailed to better redistribute income (and wealth) among the nation's population.
I never voted for Barack Obama and would give him a barely passing grade as president.<br/><br/>But, seriously, give him a break with the speeches.<br/><br/>The biggest problem with high paid speeches is the selling of influence. He is no longer president and none of his family is likely to ever hold a political office.  He therefore is clearly not selling influence.  (The Clintons, on the other hand, clearly were.)<br/><br/>Obama is what he always was - a politician.  Not a saint.  Not a transformative figure floating above the D.C. fray.  He's just another politician, and that is okay. 
It depends on what he does with the money. If he puts most of it toward his planned foundation to serve the greater good, I have no problem with it. As long as he doesn't use it to pay for portraits of himself and bribing judges and attorneys...
One very pertinent question :  if Obama was such an advocate for the poor and middle-class why did those very people lose ground to the richest during his presidency?   It is no puzzle why the contaminated media does not report the statistics that would reveal  that the widening gap in incomes  and wealth INCREASESD and ACCELERATED  during his presidency.
Excellent editorial. Making money is the American way ("monetising your skills" or something). But it is not very pretty when it comes to a figure like Obama .Actually it is not very pretty at all.  Still it has to be put into context and this editorial did just that. Thanks. 
I wish he'd take money from Wall Street, give them elegant speeches about Wall Street's responsibility for the degradation of our civil life, and then give most of the money to ProPublica or some other investigative journalism group.<br/><br/>That's what I wish. . . .
I thought about this for a while. I would pay much more to hear Mr. Obama speak than just about anybody else in public life. The four hundred thousand was actually a good bargain for the buyers.<br/>At the very least, try to remember that he is a private citizen now and as such is free to make his way in peace just like you or me.
President Obama has just left office and has been lying low for months.  He's shown astute self-control during a barrage of indictments from the current administration.  We know he is going to start a foundation.  There is nothing wrong with giving speeches that pay money, especially if the proceeds will go to build an endowment for his and other foundations.  Unfortunately, non-profits demand funds in order to do the good that they do.<br/><br/>The Obamas have moved into a relatively modest home.  He has vowed to work on our rigged jerrymandering system.  If he does just this, he will change the face of modern politics.  Give him time to breathe, please.  Look at Jimmy Carter and all the good he's done.  I have no doubt team Obama will follow suit.  <br/><br/>He already has the 'higher standard' you hope for; just wait.  We will see amazing things from this president yet.
In today's money equals power zero sum game I find it had to criticize Mr Obama for taking money for speeches.<br/>Saint Ronald the first took 1,000,000$ from Japanese interests shortly after leaving office.<br/>Unfortunately this argument always leaves the democrats fighting with one arm tied behind their back.<br/>As much a the moral high ground is appealing it is also littered with dashed democratic dreams.
Just as the presidential election in 2000 gave us the lesson of the electoral college, the election of 2016 gave us the lesson of emoluments and palm-greasing. Many of us were shocked by the malleability of the electoral system then, and are shocked by influence-peddling now.<br/>We ought to be wiser by many degrees now—wise enough to know that an honest president getting paid a lot of money after his public service isn't a big deal, whereas a dishonest president getting paid a lot of money while still in office is a scandal.<br/>There's a lot of money changing hands, folks. Let's keep our eyes on the shady stuff: the bribes, pay-forplay, dissolution of sanctions overseas, Crimean oil drilling leases, and sleazy real estate deals.
No one knows how the monies the Obamas are generating will be used. However, to create and maintain charitable foundations requires resources to  execute events and operations. Jimmy Carter's post presidential work is admirable and a model for creating positive change for numerous people and communities. We can only hope that the Obamas will have similar success. 
So Barack and Michelle Obama seem to have taken at least $65,400,000 from various sources for services rendered. He gave a speech, they wrote some books.<br/>If they use the money to establish the Obama dynasty, or to eat and drink and be merry then I will be disappointed.<br/>If they use the money to enable and persuade more Americans to exercise their right to vote then I shall again say thankyou to them for their service to you and the rest of the world.<br/>I am not casting the first stone and I am putting my money on the latter. 
Maybe you're right. But look at the bright side. What better way to prove Obama is an American citizen than by cashing in whenever and wherever possible. The people who will hammer on Obama for accepting a big speaking fee would chastise a family member for passing on the same deal.
Money money is power and makes the world go round.  What he and Michele should do is set up ways to share that profit with those less fortunate.  Perhaps they will?
He has the right to do it, but this is very disappointing. Now he is one of "them". 
I am disappointed in President Obama's decision to do this. Disheartened would be a better word. Think of John Adams, Harry Truman, Grant. They barely had enough money to return home after leaving office. <br/><br/>In the end perhaps this will add greater energy to the Progressive Revolution.  The single biggest headwind facing our country is not Trump but rather income inequelity.  Will President Obama lecture Wall Street on that subject?  I wonder if we will see a transcript?
In poorer nations, heads of states receive explicit bribes; In America it seeems they get  sophisticated implicit, unspoken promise for speaking engagements for big corporations. Way to go Mr. Obama.
Republicans and those on so-called "right wing welfare" will not heed your words. They will continue to reap the profits of speeches. However, you desire Democrats to hobble themselves just so the New York Times editorial board can successfully moralize them into de facto submission. I think not. Even better, I would hope Mr. Obama would take their money and put it towards fighting against the interests that the one-percent champion.
Sorry, but the audacious "nobility" of this editorial reads more like indignant and self-righteous umbrage.  Yeah, Obama's pocketing some big cash.  All the rest of us, of course, would turn down big money and move in to a mobile home with an outhouse.<br/><br/>  Although it is difficult for the ultra right to accept the reality that Mr. and Mrs. Obama are actually human beings, they are and their lusting after a secure future is hardly a fault the rest of us can honestly claim not to have.  <br/><br/>So perhaps we should wait a little longer than three months before attacking the former president for wanton greed.  Perhaps we should give the man a chance to devolop his post-presidential credentials.  In the meantime please remind our CEOs, our sports stars, our entertainment stars to refuse their paychecks.  And also, when you win the lottery, please deposit the proceeds in my checking account.  It's a little empty at the moment.   
Who would have thought that Barack "Hope and Change" Obama would become an instant Clintonian? Disheartening indeed that he's gobbling up 400 grand for one speech -- the equivalent of a full year's presidential salary for maybe a half-hour's "work."<br/><br/>It brings back memories of early 2009 when, instead of using the bully pulpit to maximum effect, he paid only lip service to the $20 billion in bonuses that the bailed-out bankers paid to themselves while the financial meltdown that they caused was still threatening to destroy the economy. Apparently, it was just a matter of looking ahead and playing it safe.<br/><br/>When Wall Street waves hundreds of thousands of dollars a pop and ostensibly principled "public servants" pantingly jump at the chance, it certainly underscores the diagnosis that Sen. Elizabeth Warren and precious few of her colleagues dared utter: a rigged game.<br/><br/>How sad.
Turning around Pete Townsend's 1971 lyrics, we can all now sing, "Meet the old boss, same as the new boss." <br/><br/>The Democrats for years now have been feasting at the same trough that Republicans forever have engorged themselves on. Some things never change. And probably won't.
Christian  missionaries in India had trouble getting converts because they couldn't live like the common people. The harsh life of the ordinary Indian was just too alien to Europeans.<br/>Isn't this a bit like the situation of the professional, political class in the US ?<br/>Obama's speaking fees are simply business as usual. Nothing new here, simply a professional pol enjoying the perks of the "meritocracy".<br/>Over 40% of eligible voters chose not to vote in the 2016 election as more people become alienated from a system bases on personal enrichment, rather than public service.
In many countries around the World, presidents leave office much richer than when they were elected. This is a form of corruption. Neither Obama, nor any other former president should enrich themselves as a result of their having held high office. 
True character always comes through, although why there is surprise, is a surprise. Make a list of the parties, celebrities, vacations with moguls and entitlements that were taken advantage of to the utmost extent and the speeches and book deals are the only logical path once that tap was turned off.<br/>Do I credit the Obamas with only the purest of intentions. No, I do not. These are  very upwardly mobile, elitist and self serving people.<br/>The way to prove that they are not, would be for them to step off the stage, go quietly into the night and allow the country to find a leader for the Democrats who can win next election. Neither they nor the Clintons will and that is our biggest problem.
It may well be that the "going rate" for high profile pols making speeches is 400K. That was Hilary's response when she was asked about the money she was paid for a speech she gave a few years ago to a bunch of Wall Street plutocrats. If it is the going rate, why would Obama expect and be paid anything less? Is there a differential between the rates for white pols and black? If so, why?<br/><br/>Obama was the best example of presidential rectitude since Carter. He has nothing to apologize for. Besides, who's to know what he'll do with the money? I'm guessing whatever he does will be done quietly, without fanfare, and with grace and dignity. As the president, so the man.
I am pleased that you, although fleetingly, mentioned former President Jimmy Carter!  Mr. Carter is a beacon of decency, morality, honesty and commitment to values, far exceeding all presidents before, and most especially AFTER, his term, the current 'occupant' being the complete reverse!  Thank you President Carter, and your amazing wife, Rosalynn!
The Obamas are no different than any other politicians; witness their transition from trashing Hillary in '08 to being her BFFs in '16.  Also, consider the desperate efforts to create a "legacy", no matter the consequences.  What is truly disturbing is the ongoing canonization of an ordinary politician of scant accomplishment who is now embarked on an unsurprising effort to line his pockets by trading on a mostly self-created reputation.
I know it's small potatoes, and compared to all that's going on in this country, the Obama sin is minuscule by comparison. But I hold him in such high regard that the offense for me is serious and the disappointment major. Why did he have to do this? Yes, of course you would expect it from the tone deaf, corner-cutting Clintons, but not from the brilliantly reflective Barack Obama, a man of substantial wisdom. This was just a very poor decision on his part and he clearly knew better. 
Obama is like the Sunday School Teacher who gets caught smoking. He's held to a much higher standard than most. The culture of "role models" will always let you down. He was a fine President and it appears to be a consummate gentleman and family man.  He's a person.  He was offered $400,000 for a speech.  He accepted. Most would, I would and so would you.
How do we know that this money will not be invested in furthering his social action agenda?  To assume that President Obama is a sellout doesn't give him justice.  Let's wait and see.
We talk about the new normal a lot, and this seems to me a case in point. President Obama no doubt sacrificed a lot of earning potential for the past eight years and we should not begrudge him the opportunity to make enough money to lead a more than comfortable existence, but by accepting such a large fee, he is making income disparity more normal, more acceptable.<br/><br/>We can excuse such disparity by saying that it's what the market will bear, as if the market were a force unto itself that works in mysterious ways beyond human control, the invisible hand that will make things right in the end. I'd like to think  the market doesn't have to control our societies, and I hate knowing that if the median income in this country were $40,000 (it may be closer to $30,00), at least half of us would have to work for ten years to make what one man can earn in one day. <br/><br/>When surrounded by peers who make exorbitant amounts of money, your perspective changes, and what once seemed normal is no longer enough. I often thought during Obama's presidency that he didn't viscerally feel the plight  of the middle class because during the same time period its economic situation was worsening, his was improving.  Of course the rich can feel empathy for the poor, but they no doubt lack the sense of urgency the man on the edge of ruin is experiencing..<br/><br/> I'm not sure how to stop the rise in speaking fees (and CEO salaries), but perhaps we can start by calling them outrageous, as The Times is doing here.
Who is this payment for his speech hurting? Not the middle class or the poor. He's not getting $400,000 to address Planned Parenthood. He was speaking to Wall Street, and I hope they were listening; they were not out to influence him but I'd like to think he might influence some of them. I hope Michelle can also draw good speaking fees for her commonsense views. Maybe Betsy De Vos will hear her sometime. Let's focus on Citizens United and the corruption and special interests in our current administration. - plenty to go after there. This practice of high-paid speeches from former presidents will end soon enough: Who would pay $400,000 to hear Trump's bombastic and incoherent word salad?
I'm watching MSNBC and just heard a writer for the Washington Post make the same points as in this editorial.<br/><br/>The writer is claiming that Obama is "tarnishing his legacy by taking speaker fees" etc. That he should "help the Democratic party by setting a new example."<br/><br/>This strikes me and just about everybody else as hypocritical nonsense. <br/><br/>So where do these ideas come from? Why do both papers, and others, have viewpoints so out of synch with the public?<br/><br/>The answer is, talking points. When media as a group start to talk about something ridiculous, it means spin from some place.<br/><br/>This spin seeks to tarnish the Obama legacy by accusing him of doing something routinely done by everyone else and turned into an art form by the Clintons.<br/><br/>And that's why I'm looking in their direction as the source for this absurd and offensive story line.
Mr. Obama should be able to take any amount of money for speaking if and only if he stays on the sideline in politics.  If he becomes active then I believe he should not take money for speeches from groups that are active in politics.  Otherwise, make as much money as he can.  
This country is now deeply divided.  Anything that will contribute to genuine dialogue at all levels, and move toward balancing the great inequalities that exist, seems to be called for and helpful.  <br/><br/>I would imagine that if Obama donated speaking fees to not only his own foundation, but also to causes he believes in, would move in a positive direction.  And that act might also help him earn the Nobel Prize he already received, and also help him sleep peacefully at night.
This Editorial is Way off base. There's a big difference btw a potential or current President and a former one. The former are offered money by groups who want to see the good work they did while in the WH continues. The donation, or reward, is to help lift the voice of a proven champion for a dedicated constituency. Money for sitting Presidents, or politicians pining to be one, is  for control of the current government's will.<br/><br/>In the post Citizens United world money controls the volume of the message. It would be tragic to allow the voice of this most elegant former President to be muffled by shortsighted misapplication of a valued principle.
To break the cycle of minimum wage poverty that grips and ever growing number of Americans, to end the steady erosion of the middle class, to restore living wages, pensions, extend health care to all and protect the environment, Democrats must take on Wall Street not sell out to them. I voted for Obama twice, but I'm very disappointed in him now.
It is probably better for a former Democratic President to talk to the influential members of Wall Street than an aspiring Democratic Presidential-candidate. Mr. Obama does not have to run for office again, and he can use his speech to remind the wealthy members of society that they need to act like responsible citizens of the United States. He can even release the transcript of the speech to show that he did so.<br/><br/>As well, if Mr. Obama wants to help the Democrats in 2018, and if he wants his voice to be heard within the party, he will need bring some money to the big game.  It would be nice to see U.S. elections require less money, but that seems like wishful thinking at this point. Not even 65 million dollar from a book deal goes very far in an election cycle. While I envision Mr. Obama being an excellent spokesman for the Democratic party, I doubt that any amount of money will make him more or less popular in key states that the Dems lost in 2016.<br/><br/>Finally, Mr. Obama has endured eight rather long arduous year in a job that clearly aged him prematurely. I have no problem with him earning money after the fact, especially when the current president appears to improving his family fortunes while on the job.
Like other limousine liberals, the Obamas choose to cash in and say to others do as I say and not as I do.  Every American has their right to give more than their obligatory taxes to the federal government to allow the government to make choices on how best to allocate these dollars to social programs, military spending, education, etc.  I know not a single person who chooses this path.  Instead, those that demand greater taxes and social programs do so from the peanut gallery.  At best, they provide it to charities of their choice, reinforcing the very notion of not government.  So, will the Obama's take their $65M and give it away or simply act like the .01% that they are?
People here are asking why others are “surprised” that Obama would take large speaking fees from Wall Street. Others say “he has the right to take whatever people want to pay him,” which could be used to justify so many wrong things. Personally I am so disappointed that this is Obama’s first big re-entry into the public eye, and only 100 days after leaving. If he intended to transform his speech pay into a donation (after a $65 million book deal, he cannot say he “needs” the income) he should have made that apparent at the time the news broke of his contract with Cantor Fitzgerald. I hope others are correct that “President Obama will use the revenue from his speeches for a good cause” but now I wonder. He certainly has ceded the moral high ground here and once again reinforced the notion that politicians often act like corrupt sellouts after their brief time serving the public.
He is entitled to do as he wishes, of course; but this is deeply disappointing, even inexplicable, for Obama's supporters. It would be perfectly understandable for a relatively young father, who until recently was paying off his own school loans, to wish to increase his wealth, quickly and painlessly, before settling on a new career path. However, Obama has already closed a $65 million book deal (which probably doesn't even include global royalties for years to come). He has no need for additional means to buy time, freedom, a roof or his daughters' tuition. Might he not have donated his speaking fee to charity - Médecins sans frontières, the Gates foundation or even his own charitable activities? As it stands, there is no good explanation for his choice - but, in the light of some of his post-presidential activities and company, many discouraging ones. 
What amount of money would be acceptable for the President to accept? Where is the line? I am a bit unclear why we want to hold Mr. Obama to a higher standard now that he is out of office. If we embrace a capitalistic value, why are we in opposition when a man who certainly worked extremely hard to be in that position to earn a lot money, now earns it. The market wants to pay, let it pay. It's ok to accept $65MM for two books, but not ok to accept $400K for a speech? It would be ok to speak at a University, but is not ok to speak on Wall Street? Yes, Mr. Obama made a case against Wall Street before and during his Presidency. Perhaps, the greatest of all ironies is now, they are willing to pay a ton of money to listen. Let them pay.
I guess I am not that surprised by this turn of events.  I suppose Mr. Obama did his civic duty, fully committed 8 years and more to public service and achieved a great deal with respect to the protection of civil liberties, human rights and environmental protection.  He is a young man and has much to achieve still.  I certainly hope that he will remain engaged in the public discourse, a reasoned perspective of someone who has been there, is certainly needed in these times.  The question I am more concerned with is what will he do with his hard won influence, how will he help to change the futures of Americans, and the democratic party. How and when will he contribute to the public discourse on the pressing issues of the day? <br/><br/>What is more disturbing to me is the clear disregard for the reality, if not the optics of financial or any other conflicts of interest displayed by the current sitting president.  That is what we should be talking about.
Obama has sold his soul.  Actually it began, as he acknowledged, year ago, when his ambition for political success overtook his loftier motives.  We elected him, at least I did, not seeing just how much of his soul he had sold.  Rhetoric clouded the facts.  
At least he is doing it after leaving office, not while on the way in when those fees could unduly influence policy.
The Obamas will almost certainly not seek public office and any speaking fees and book advances and royalties they receive cannot be viewed as bribes or influence peddling. This is a far cry from what Hillary did and she was rightly criticized for her behavior.  While it would be laudable for the Obamas to fund their foundation with their earnings, they are under no moral obligation to do so. <br/><br/>What is most objectionable and a perversion of our governance is the willingness, even eagerness, of politicians of both parties to accept "contributions " from professional lobbyists and individuals. This has turned our representative democracy into something which is neither representative nor democratic. The more money, the more influence. And the more influence, the more power in the hands of the few who can afford it. Our Supreme Court has put its imprimatur on the process with its Citizens United decision and our national character is much the worse for it. It is little wonder why so many of us abhor politics and politicians.
It is my belief that Obama will use some of the money he earns by making speeches to business to benefit the development of the less fortunate so they can use their talents on behalf of the world. In addition, Obama being Obama will invite those business leaders to dedicate themselves to being more than profit makers. Business can be a positive change agent in the world. What they need is a constant invitation to tend to the world with the same passion that they to their stakeholders. Business is not the enemy; we must entice them up to use their resources on behalf of humankind.
You do understand not everybody reads  books (unfortunately)? In this same issue you have an article about the President not reading. It seems to me that speaking to a largely captive audience is one way to reach people. And why not bankers and financiers? I'm assuming it would be good for them to hear non Wall Street ideas. I'm just not getting this twisting of outrage regarding the paid speaking circuit which as you note most former Presidents have done. It's not lobbying. And we should remember it's not money or banks or Wall Street that is inherently bad, it is what each one does with that money and power that should be looked at for intent and action and evaluated.
And if he gives free speeches to certain organizations and charities, won't he seem "beholden" to those that he selected as worthy of his time and talents? The masses seem to have no problem with the current president and his family monetizing the presidency in real time, nor did they have a  problem with his shady dealings brought to light during the campaign. This is the world we live in - pay for play on every level in every sense of the word. Money IS power whether principled or not. The American people are aware of that and just want a piece of the pie no matter how it is served or, seemingly, who it is served by.<br/><br/>President Obama gave his life and family to this country for eight, basically thankless years, and all you can do is criticize his choices in his now "private" life?
Good grief!  Why shouldn't Obama be able to accept a large sum from Wall Street bankers for a speech?  He isn't running for office or in office.  He is a private citizen who should be able to earn money without causing a furor.  I am sure he would also speak to non-profits and charities without charge. Are we expecting him to turn to ashes and sackcloth?
The article says it all, most Americans don't believe the Democratic Party represents them.
Leave him alone. He's not an elected official anymore so there is no conflict of interest. The money will probably fund a foundation that will do great things. What is he supposed to do? trudge along dusty back roads planting apples or something?
One difference is that Obama will certainly find ways to use his post-office generated wealth for the benefit of society. Trump has already shown that he will use his in-office generated wealth for the benefit of Trump.
Because he did not give his speech money tio his foundation and/or other charities, we can see him clearly.<br/><br/>How much harm will this do to the Dems, of whom 67% of the people are dissatisfied with?
Maybe Obama should move back to the South Side of Chicago and take up residence in a run-down house in a violence-filled neighborhood.  He could set up a soup kitchen in the area and pass out used clothing to the poor people.  Where to you draw the line on how altruistic a person has to be to deserve praise?  I have a feeling that some of the money he takes in for speaking will find its way to good works or to strengthening the progressive forces in American politics.  I don't think he himself knows what he is going to do with it.  He has to be very hurt and disappointed by the way things have worked out.  Maybe the money is just a way of assuaging a bit the pain he must feel at seeing how destructive forces in American society are overwhelming people like himself, whose good intentions could not save the middle class from the ravages of the unchecked free market, which unerringly rewards the already rich and chastises practically everyone else.
How is accepting fees for speaking engagements morally any different than signing lavish book deals?<br/><br/>In either case, do purchasers of Obama's services hold any claim to the content of what he delivers? His time in office is done.  How can cozying up to billionaires negatively impact policy?   Besides, who else can an ex-president hang out with but billionaires?<br/><br/>I have no problem with Obama enriching himself post-political-career.  It would only become a problem if he decided to step back into the political arena, as perhaps a judge or a senator.  Until then, he should enjoy the freedoms that any private citizen enjoys...to quietly get rich if he prefers.
Yes, the suggestion makes sense that Mr. Obama donate the $400,000 to his foundation for "training and elevating a new generation of political leaders in America" or, better still, to one of the foundations dedicated to serving the poorest of the poor. Politicians of both parties seem to have forgotten poor people in the competition for the votes of the "middle class."
Legacy sold to the highest bidder. So sad to see. 
Your suggestion that he give his speaking fees to his foundation should have slready occurred to him, since that's where the money will likely wind up-.  Better that he not accept such huge fees  in the first place, but having them go directly to his foundation  would mitigate much of the credibility damage.
President Obama served admirably during a time of unprecedented presidential obstruction and animosity. If someone wants to pay him $400,000 for a speech, I don't have a problem with it. How many people would turn that down? I sure wouldn't. Besides, next to the family of shills occupying the White House now, this looks almost quaint.
He is a private citizen now.  No worries of influence and shady deals affecting government policy.
Obama, proving he's just like the rest of them. What, $65 million from the book deals wasn't enough? Perhaps Bernie Sanders will introduce legislation providing that ex-presidents who give paid speeches lose their pensions, travel budgets, staff budgets and lifetime health care. I certainly don't feel like my tax dollars should pay for any of this for the Obamas, now that they've started gorging at the trough only 100 days out of office. Wasn't the presidential pension provided so that past occupants wouldn't degrade the office by selling it? As the Clintons did, and the Obamas are doing now. Only Carter stayed truly gracious and firm in his principles. Obama, he sold out in 100 days. After cavorting with billionaires for three months. It's the height of tackiness. 
One quick observation. There's a big difference between  this and using the office of the presidency to enrich your self while you were president.
 $400,000? It's already $800,000.
the only guy I can think of in American politics that would forego 400k wall street speaking appearances and millions of dollars in media publicity is Bernie Sanders, who could and should be our sitting President.  Democrats talks a good game, but their just as duplicitous and money hungry as the Republicans.
There's a conundrum here.  Wall Streeters are supposed to be so highly compensated due to an alleged ability to discern unrecognized value.  Former President Obama is to be paid $400k for an hour of his time - when the American people paid him about half that for more than 2000 hours of his time each year for 8 years.<br/><br/>So either the saavy Wall Streeters aren't, or he stiffed the country and didn't share his best thoughts for two terms.  In either case, someone should get their money back.
Perhaps this is compensation for the Obama Administration treating Wall Street with kid gloves after the Wall Street-induced financial crisis of 2008 and for appointing Wall Street luminaries to key positions.
Who seriously believes Mr Obama would be rewarded this way if he presided over the dissolution of Goldman Sachs and the zeroing out of its equity?<br/><br/>The prospect of post-presidency payouts sets up conflicts of interest for the office during his or her term.  Unless he donates the "earnings" of the speech to the US Treasury, he's in no position to criticize Trump on self-dealing.<br/><br/>It's sad to see Obama help establish as normal the Presidency as just another resume stuffer for would-be plutocrats.
It's certainly frustrating that attempts to urge the current president onto an ethical path have failed, but a past president's actions can't atone for a current president's shortcomings. So this critique seems misplaced.
Retired senior political figures have the right to pursue all the bounties that their position offers. But in an era where a shattered Democratic Party is dismissed as a group of tone deaf coastal elites, Obama should have taken one for the team, at least for now.
Obama was always in Wall Street's pocket. No banker suffered any consequences during his tenure as a result of the economic collapse<br/>between 2007-2009 (which he had nothing to do with).<br/><br/>Also let us remember that his Attorney General, Eric Holder stated,<br/>"Banks are too big to prosecute." Yes, he actually said that.
I have the deepest admiration for President Obama but his time as an elected official is over. He has served the country with honor and dignity for 8 years and we are a better country for it. As a private citizen he is entitled to make a living and ask the going rate. No one is forcing these bankers to pay the fee and what influence do you think they are buying now that Obama is out of office? What in the Editorial Board's opinion would be a legitimate fee? Would the standard be $25,000 or $50,000 or $100,000. Why is penury more honorable than fairly earned wealth?
For me the questions around Obama's move to the "Hillary phase"of his career makes perfect sense; Obama was always a sensitive, well spoken moderate Republican at heart. <br/><br/>But what I don't get is why Cantor Fitzgerald(?) would waste $400,000 on a speech and presumed access to a man who is, politically speaking, a retiree.<br/><br/>Or maybe I am misunderstanding and it is a "job well done, welcome home" tour?
Obamas still have two young daughters to put through college. Obama himself could not do anything about college tuition hikes, and very little about student debt and student loans, during his tenure. In just the past 8 years, college costs have escalated to appalling levels. My college professor friends complain that they do not benefit in salary increases, from these college tuition hikes. Yet, it gets more and more expensive. The Obamas are fortunate in the same way the Clintons were, that they rose from ordinary humble backgrounds and became celebrity magnets. From movie stars to entertainment industry, to sports stars, to Silicon Valley, Wall Street, everyone surrounded the Clintons and the Obamas everywhere they went and still do. These are awful visuals for mid America and those who are suffering. My kids (older than Obamas', although Obama is my age) are paying student loans post college, and will continue to do so for decades to come. Obama, will make in one speech, what he made in one annual salary as President. That won't even pay for one 4 year college. He will need couple three such speeches to make enough to pay for his children's higher education.<br/>Why on earth did Obama not support either Biden or Bernie, is totally beyond us. I get emails from elderly folks from oceans away, who ask why oh why did Obama choose to support Hillary, it is just the wrong move at the wrong time in history.
It is not what the Obama's, or the Clinton's, or GW and Laura or anybody else gets paid to speak or whatever else it is that they do.  It is entirely about what they do with that money and do they pay their fair share of taxes.  If the market will bear then they are entitled to make the money.  It is we, the every man and woman, who have contributed this (already great) country the country that helped to pave the roads to their success and good fortune and they owe it to us, all of us and themselves to give back.
I share I agree completely. He's in the 1% or close, and l it or not, the soul of the party. Why not live comfortably and avoid the hobnobbing with Wall Street? Barry, you are needed. Desperately. Carter may have been an average president, but he inspires in his life after. Obama could do likewise and add to his already secure legacy. I hope he does.
Only rich, white males are entitled to free market success? Or liberals have to work for pennies to be true to ideals?<br/>GOP leaders get to celebrate unabashed capitalism in curtailing workers' rights, pay, and safety, while being portrayed as the champion of the working class, and Democrats, who initiate protections and pay equity are anathema. It seems possible to me that President Obama talking about healthcare to Cantor Fitzgerald has a chance to provide insight to Wall Street which could improve the current system in ways that he was never given the opportunity to do with an obstructionist Congress in DC. Your editorial perpetuates the unfair double standard against Democrats-- if they aren't financially successful-- i.e. Community organizer, why take them seriously? And if they are, they are sellouts to their ideals. Clearly the GOP and the current WH administration are not beholden to such expectations.
Campaign finance reform would go a long way to handling the wealthy donor problem. Without it, no party will dare to ditch those donors. And, so far, no Congress has dared to pass the necessary reform. The swamp survives.<br/><br/>As to Obama's receiving $400,000 for a speech: I'd say he's earned every penny and who knows what he will do with it? He may well donate it.
It is a free market for speeches for every politician.  Someone had to be willing to pay for it. 
What did you expect? That he would speak for free? Who cares, really. I do believe you wrote not long ago that Michelle Obama met with school girls. I am sure she did not charge for that.<br/><br/> The Obamas are now probably richer than they ever imagined they would be. What is wrong with that? What is wrong with living in a nice house, sending your kids to great schools. Their wealth was achieved by hard work. And much sacrifice. They sacrificed their privacy. They sacrificed their children's privacy. They were, and still are, constantly under attack and criticized. I cannot for the life of me understand why anyone would want to do that. Even our current president. They certainly are not doing it for the money. Aren't there more pressing issues to cover in the news? 
Oh, the perils of capitalism!   The Obamas are making money off their celebrity, their knowledge and experience.  Horrors!   <br/><br/>I wonder what kind of hourly rate they could charge as lawyers?    <br/><br/>For the past 8 years,  the Obamas have lived and worked in that rarefied world of national politics.  They have developed friendships and relationships with celebrities, international leaders and the wealthy.  After their tenure in office, do we really expect them to throw the metaphorical Rolodexes away, delete contacts and refuse exorbitant but market rate speaking fees?  <br/><br/>What kind of New Puritanism is this?  Does it only apply to Democrats with the temerity to rise from the middle class to positions of power and wealth?<br/><br/>Now, if there were any evidence of quid pro quo - favoritism during the Presidency in exchange for generous speaking fees post-Presidency, that would be a different matter.  But there isn't.  <br/><br/>Of course, as Trump makes ridiculously clear, ethics don't apply to Presidents.  Under the Trump rule, receiving economic benefit from favor-seekers DURING the time in office is not only permissible but is good business.<br/><br/>PS. Do we know that the Obamas are not donating fees to their charities and political causes?
It would be terrific if the Obamas, through their foundation or otherwise, contributed that money towards education in basic economics for the average American--so that everyone could learn how to benefit from investing in the American economy rather than just the 1%.<br/><br/>Most American children grow up with virtually no education in economics. If more Americans learned the basics of investing from an early age, and the time value of money, the economy would be fairer and healthier, and more Americans would benefit.<br/><br/>Only rich children learn this now.  Nobody teaches poor children how to save and invest. A dollar here, a dollar there beginning in grade school.  It could be a revolution.
I am glad to see the NYT editorial board noting that the Democratic Party leadership has lost touch with the American working people it has traditionally represented and observing that "Democratic leaders unseemly attachment to the party's wealthies donors contributed to that indictment." Why not just say Hillary Clinton instead of Democratic leaders. however? There was a candidate who was and remains closely linked to working people and not those wealth donors, Bernie Sanders. The Times did everything in its power to praise Clinton despite her obvious ties to Wall Street and the wealthy, while initially ignoring and later denigrating the Sanders campaign, which was the vital party link to working people. I'm glad that you have finally seen the obvious, but Isn't it time to admit that your coverage of and commentary on the Democratic Party's presidential nomination campaign left a lot to be desired? 
I Obama will stay in touch with reality and will be candid about the mistakes and successes of his administration because he is too much of a role model to too many.<br/><br/>He could still set himself apart in the speech department if he would give two free speeches to the underprivileged kids in problem schools for each one he charges.
Warren Buffet has spent his entire life making millions off the stock market. Bill Gates made billions in compensation from a software company. And yet both are highly regarded and respected men. Why, because their contributing the vast majority of their wealth back to those in need.<br/><br/>President Obama is charging a well healed Wall Street group 400k for a speech. We need to ask ourselves this question. What will he do with the money? Will he use it to further enrich himself, or will he use it for the betterment of mankind?<br/><br/>I'll go with the betterment of mankind.
If you're number one objective to inspire a new generation of Democratic leaders then it just doesn't make sense to take $400k from Wall Street, especially when you already have a $65m book deal. I think this article gets that point across in a nicely nuanced way. We can question his judgment on taking this money while acknowledging the great good the president has accomplished and appealing to his better judgment for the future.
Obama is a private citizen and will not be running for public office again.<br/>Any speaking fees he may attain at this juncture are a small recompense for the toll public office took on him and his family.<br/><br/>The one thing all politicians have in common is that their first priority is always re-election.   The current president, just 100 days into his administration, takes crucial time away from profiting in any way, shape or form that he can (and if not him, anyone related to him by blood or marriage, and anyone else with any authority in his administration) from the office he holds to pander to the faithful in anticipation of 2020.<br/><br/>Democrats look for one reason NOT to vote for a candidate, while Republicans only need one reason to support a candidate.  If the Dems learn anything from this past election cycle, it should be to stop requiring that their candidates be perfect, saintly creatures beyond reproach in every way.   
I suppose the Bushes did not seek to profit from public speeches in their post presidencies; their profiteering was perpetrated during their presidencies. It also helped they they were wealthy beforehand. The Clintons posted post presidential profits; their sin was that they dared to run again. <br/><br/>I am truly ambivalent about President Obama's paid speaking. If he only does paid speeches to advocate for Wall Street, then that is an abdication for his original mandate. He if uses these opportunities to encourage corporate responsibility and change, that would be acceptable. Until the Citizens United ruling is overturned big money is a reality of the business of politics and government. Perhaps the text of his speeches should be published as a check on how diluted his position becomes. Obama rose to prominence as an academician who became a community organizer on the way to the Senate. Obama is not a revolutionary rabble rouser, he is a moderate politician who represents prudence and decency. He has always also been corporate savvy. Obama is also not a man of the streets. He has juggled his balance among these worlds tentatively, at times. We shouldn't expect differently from him now.  THAT he is paid to speak is not the issue, what he says is the issue. If a black man profits, America disdains. He'll either make himself irrelevant to the return of pluralistic American values, or a unique beacon of hope. I won't proscribe any path for him.
A deeper dive into the survey data would be revealing.  Other post-election polls have shown that quite a few Americans find identity politics repellent.  Another good-sized cohort of voters believes that there can be such a thing as too much regulation.  And lots of other voters think corporations create jobs.  If we assume that all of the voters who feel this way are Republican or libertarians, then that's half of the electorate.  If we assume that some Democrats agree, then that's a majority.  And it would explain why the states, congress and every layer of government in America has shifted right.  
In an era of purchased influence, why can’t former President Barack Obama set a higher standard?<br/><br/>But Obama has set the highest standard for purchased influence. I know of nobody else who, as a consequence of having been an influential person, has been able to command $400,000 for a single presentation. This is an outstanding American success story.  I can't think what you're complaining about. Horatio Alger could have imagined no better.<br/><br/>No idea, of course, what the sponsors expect in return, now that Obama no longer has influence. Unless it's simply the final payment for past services rendered.
What he says in these 400K speeches is much more important than the compensation.  I hope he talks about the hopelessness of the marginalized and ignored in this country while the rich and the powerful get richer and more powerful.  
Disappointed, just a bit.  Surprised, not at all.  Some explanation is in order.<br/><br/>President Obama governed as a left-leaning, Republican-Lite politician in the mold of the Clintons.  He worked Wall Street for donations and he chose never to hold Wall Street accountable for its role in the Great Recession.  There was a Pecora Commission during the Roosevelt administration and there was a Simpson-Bowles Commission during the Obama administration.  Enough said.
Paid "speeches" are generally distasteful. I do, however, appreciate the Robin Hood aspect of doing them for charity. <br/><br/>These speeches really took off when Ronald Reagan, just a couple weeks out of office, gave two speeches in Japan for $2 million. This was 1989 when $2 million was real money! He needed it to pay for his new Bel Air house. <br/><br/>I have no problem with former presidents earning a good living after the White House. But it does seem like that money partially belongs to us as their former employers. I know they pay taxes on the income (well, we'll see about Donald Trump), but it costs a lot of taxpayer money to move these guys around to their speech appointments with the secret service and all.<br/><br/>The income should be split 50/50 with the Treasury Department. That seems fair. 
If Obama rejects the post- (and all too sadly, pre-) presidential Goldman speaking circuit, it would surely help to beat back the tide of the Democratic party seeming out of touch to the electorate. If he engages with it, which I must say, I am surprised to see seems likely, then he will open up future candidates to attacks from Republicans that prospective Democratic candidates are just hoping to use the presidency to enrich themselves. <br/><br/>I'm of the mind that what we need is not another billion dollar familial foundation, but a moral and ethical leader that speaks to the people because they live similar lives. Sadly, the party apparatus, made up of the elite, will likely not support such a leader, and thus the system perpetuates.
President Obama has been out of office for a mere 100 days.  After these exhaustive 8 years, he dared to go on vacation with his wife to places that could offer him privacy and security and he has given ONE paid speech, the contents of which- affordable health care- should be the only abiding concern.  
I am extremely disappointed in president Obama's decision to cash out on the paid speaker circuit. With $65 million in book deals, how much more does he need? Actions like this, especially in light of the 2016 election in which Clinton's paid speeches were such a turn off to so many voters, send the wrong message about what the Democratic party stands for (or should stand for). He absolutely should be donating any speaker fees he collects to charity, not to mention the campaigns of Democrats running for office who keep bombarding ordinary people like me with email requests for donations! Go hit him up instead.
Because of who now occupies the White House, the grave importance of the 2018 election, media spin/slander from wealthy right wing groups in key demographics, Obama should reconsider. Make the speech, but donate all speaking fees, (in a public ceremony), to a needy, underfunded organization in a Red State. This would certainly challenge the media optics, and would be an act of great leadership. 
It is no longer President Obama, it is Mr. Obama. And he is retired. By what ethical principle or moral authority does anyone have the right to tell him not to take money for any legal purpose once he has left government service? No one has suggested this is payment for services rendered during his public service. Mr. Obama has performed his public service admirably over his career. That service is demeaned by implicitly suggesting that being compensated for his time after his service is somehow questionable or compromising when there is no basis for such a claim. And why would the NYT times assume that what Mr. Obama is saying is inconsistent with his past positions on issues?<br/><br/>There are many people in this country who have done far less for the good of the United States then Barack Obama and who are paid far more. And this is particularly the case when compared to the incumbent.<br/><br/>In this country the market sets the compensation. Supply and demand. And there are not many great former Presidents around to compete on the lecture circuit. The NYT needs to seriously ask itself what possible basis, other then perhaps a bit of envy, there can be for moral outrage in these circumstances. Given what President Obama did for this country, I cannot and will not begrudge him his due.
Odd that the NYT would criticize Mr. Obama for accepting speaking fees after leaving office while TWITUS is likely enriching himself and his family while IN office.<br/><br/>As someone who has worked on events which routinely hire high profile speakers, I know that every president, vice president, cabinet member, and celebrity (e.g. Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr., and Colin Powell) are very much in demand as soon as they retire, and command high fees for a couple of years.
It is always about the money.  This is the United States.  With politicians it is always about the politicians.  For over 50 years I have always thought of myself as a Democrat.  No more after the Hillary/Obama cash-in.  One party of billionaires vs a second party of billionaires.  From now on I vote Green.
In a market-driven capitalist economy, quality always finds a buyer. If an Obama speech attracts $400,000, so be it. There are many investment bankers making that much each day, not to mention the per game earnings of your favorite athletes. The quality of their performance demands that. Jeez! Obama's presence is worth much, much more. 
I don't mind him cashing out a little.  His foundation could be a good thing, provided its emphasis is on developing new young Democratic office seekers, saving our Republic...and the rest of the world... and not about his personal "legacy".  God knows the rest of us need some centralized, permanent structure, some organization, to channel the newly risen strength of opposition movements.  Some structure that speaks for anyone who disagrees with the GOP and wants to regain some measure of political strength.  The DNC seems to be MIA.  But the Koch brothers, Heritage Foundation, NRA and the others keep up a steady propaganda storm.  Where's the effective pushback going to come from?  So go ahead Barack , let's see what you got.
Exactly what detail does the New York Times editorial board object to in criticizing Mr. Obama's acceptance of the $400,000 for a speech?  Is it the dollar amount? Would $100,000 been equally egregious? Can he accept $50,000? Why should he be held to this standard when he is now a private citizen? He gave his service to this country and now he can reap the rewards. I see no diminishment of a great and principled man. 
I recall how a few months before Obama left office he invited a bunch Americans to the White House and presented them with medals for public service. Almost all were celebrities -- Robert DeNiro, Kareem Abdul Jabbar, etc. I thought it was strange. Now he's gone the route of easy money. And Trump continues to overturn Obama's policy legacies. Well, at least Obama will be a 1 percenter like Trump.
That a Wall Street firm is interested, at least $400,000 worth, in hearing what President Obama has to say is somewhat encouraging. His insight may provide a possible antidote to the dystopian state provided by the current illegitimate administration and the Republican congress that supports it.
I am REALLY over all the whining about this.   The bankers Obama agreed to talk to care only about money - they equate it directly to power and class and relevance, and afford no credence to anything that isn't preceded by a dollar sign and followed by many zeroes.   As such, the problem with Obama's speech isn't that he's getting $400,000, it's that he didn't demand $1,000,000 for it (which they'd have paid), so as to ensure they paid VERY close attention to what he had to say.   If Obama (or anyone) is serious about getting through to this particular piece of the 1%, then he has to (literally) work in the currency of their world and make it the most costly advice they're liable to get.   
At the very least, President Obama is not selling actual influence as it would seem so many current office holders do.  He still has the chance to turn around his post-presidency, a position with no term limit, and create a legacy more in line with what President Carter has done.  In fairness to the Obamas, maybe we should let them finish raising their family before we tell them how to spend their time or earn their money.
Let's see now.<br/><br/>According to an article in Forbes, by sports writer Vincent Frank, "Thus far in his career, (Tom) Brady has earned $835,000 per start and $1.07 million per win."  Add in endorsements, and he's rich enough to be friends with Donald.  That's rich.<br/><br/>It has been reported that Donald's buddy Howard Stern, assuming they're still speaking after Stern voted for Clinton, makes 90 million per year in salary alone.<br/><br/>Those two are gifted, but they're entertainers.  Then we have a no-so-gifted entertainer, Kim Kardashian, who made over 50 million in 2016.<br/><br/>The list above could get very long very fast, but you get my point.  If the market value for a former two-term president is $400,000 per speech, what's the problem?  He'll pay his taxes, unlike our present president, and you can bet your booty he'll donate an enormous amount of the money he earns to charity and do many good works for free, also unlike our present president.<br/><br/>In a nutshell, so what. 
The overriding concern of the Democrats is not being out of touch with "ordinary Americans," but being out of touch with the top 1%. That's why they are so often, and so rightly, accused of elitism. The trick is to do a few things for those ordinary Americans while remaining of the 1%, by the 1%, and for the 1%. The balancing act is precarious, and it doesn't always work, as we've seen in the last few years. The Republicans are obviously much better at faux populism, and this has proven decisive. Image trumps noblesse oblige every time. 
While both Republican and Democratic leaders have an unseemly attachment to their party's wealthiest donors, at least the Democrats make some attempt to actually fix our nation's problems and improve the quality of life for it's citizens. 
No Democrat should be speaking to a group that can afford to pay $400,000 to hear a speech.  Democrats, who as the press tells us are wondering about their identity (I'm dubious about that) need to be, again, the party of working people and the disenfranchised.  We need to be the party that speaks for workers on the (diminishing) production lines, and workers in warehouses and workers in healthcare and workers in sales.  We are not the party of Wall Street and should not try to be.  <br/><br/>Sure, it's nice to mingle with rich people.  They're nice (at least they often are).  And they have nice cars and nice homes.  But let's remember that it's easy for them to be nice--they have the money.  When a poor man buys you a cup of coffee, that's more to him than paying $1000 to go to a fancy dinner is to the titans of commerce.  <br/><br/>It's May Day.  A good day to remember where the Democratic Party came from, and where it should be.  
President Obama is in trouble for accepting a speaking fee of $400 000. The Treasury Secretary forgot about $95 million in his real estate portfolio, and the public seem completely disinterested.
With all the things going in with the current incumbent.... need I list them? You focus on this? If Obama can manage to influence debates on investment, all for the good. If people pay for something, they are more likely to listen. 
It is to be hoped that the former President will tell the bankers things they would otherwise not hear.  And take their $400,000 for their privilege to be lectured by a truly remarkable man.  <br/><br/>It is also interesting to note that most of the critics of the former President are also in the elites and doing well.  Pot calling the kettle black?  
The average person cannot comprehend how an entity could possess so much extra cash that they can toss 400 grand at a casual social event. Nor can they<br/>understand why some such an entity would pay that much money and have gotten nothing in return, how this is not in some way a payback for some favor received, how this is not some form of corruption. It illustrates as no words can  the gulf between the haves and the rest of us. 
Barack Obama has earned every penny he will receive for his speeches. I would much prefer that someone with his values and record of leadership speaks to Wall Street, than someone who is already in its back pockets. It is then up to him how he expresses his values by what he does with his money.
I fail to understand the outrage.<br/><br/>In America, people get paid to speak, and it's our much beloved market forces that are at work here.  How much they get paid depends on how desirable the speaker is and the organization that wants him to speak.  Even George W. Bush gets invited and paid to speak, and some day the current president will get paid  to "speak."  <br/><br/>Take a look at this guide for keynote speakers and make sure you read the last line.<br/><a href="http://evanbailyn.com/keynotespeakers/the-ultimate-guide-to-keynote-speaker-fees/" title="http://evanbailyn.com/keynotespeakers/the-ultimate-guide-to-keynote-speaker-fees/" target="_blank">http://evanbailyn.com/keynotespeakers/the-ultimate-guide-to-keynote-spea...</a><br/><br/>Obama is now a private citizen and no longer in public or academic service, so there is no question of conflict of interest if he accepts speaking fees from a private sector entity.  He is not running for office and these are not campaign contributions.<br/><br/> I have no doubt that he will remain in enormous demand as a speaker, and will at different times get paid different amounts, including sometimes zero, depending on where he speaks.  As a private citizen, what he does with the money is his business, whether it goes to his foundation or another charity or somewhere else.  <br/><br/>Get a life, people!  
The myth of the Democratic party and the myth of Obama has always been  to talk and to walk the path of cool caring for the people. Yet from the beginning his major financial support has come from wall street and the banks.The bail out of the banks without any criminal prosecution was the earliest sign of his and the Clinton Democratic Party's ideological bankruptcy.He and his bank funded and conservatively educated economic thinkers could not imagine a banking system or an economic system run for the benefit of and for the people.Instead he gave us a bail out that was Republican-lite.He also gave us a health care system that was Republican-lite when it could have been some form of Medicare for all.And worst of all he gave us seven wars that will go on forever because it keeps the military industrial complex in place.So why shouldn't he collect his 400,000 dollar reward, he earned it.Yes, let Mr. cool, not Mr. courage, enjoy the money secure in the knowledge that he ended the myth of the Democratic Party being anything other than a party of big money.<br/>And remember he did all this while he had control of both the House and the Senate.  
"There’s little doubt that Democratic leaders’ unseemly attachment to the party’s wealthiest donors contributed to that indictment."<br/>And celebrities. The Democratic Party now caters to the very wealthy and those who gain from government funded influence peddling and privilege.  Not the working class. Not the middle class and certainly not ordinary tax payers and business owners.<br/>Look to the demise of the Labour Party. That needs to change. 
If Barack Obama receives $400,000 for a speech to a Wall Street firm, and his content, tone, eloquence and integrity are consistent with what he has said in the past, perhaps he can influence some of his audience to evolve and use their wealth for the greater good, or quit their jobs and serve others. He should ask for $500,000.
Mr Obama has earned the right to receive a nice sweet fee for his speeches and appearances.  I suspect his words will have lots of value especially now.  Plus we should not buy into the myth that the Dems have lost touch with their constituency.  At the very least they did not lie to vulnerable voters, hungry for false promises.  Most remained honest and took the high road.  I have every confidence that Mr Obama will do the same. 
I agree. I am disappointed in his decision. He doesn't neeed the money at all. I really admired him as a President, but I feel he has somehow let us down by this decision.
I am  not sure why everyone is surprised at this. In 2008 we hoped and dreamed we had elected a progressive intent on making our lives better. A man for the people. Then he named his cabinet,populated mainly by Goldman Sachs alumni and their lobbyist friends, so no,  not a progressive.  It was under his watch that not s single banker even got indicted for the Great Recession because, as his Attorney General said "its hard". 
Trickle-down economics reigns. We should pay as much attention to the mechanics of avarice as we do to theories relating to redistribution of wealth. Yes, Mr. Obama should make clear what he intends to do with such enormous sums. However, let's not second-guess a man who swims against the tide quite so quickly. In order to understand the currents, he has to first wade into the ocean.
In a nation that promotes celebrity and personality cults, the American system of political leadserhsip today is based on the construction of personas that signal the virtue of dominant cultural values and address the emotions rather than the intellect of voters. In fact, it is of no significance If Mr. Obama speaks for free or 10 million dollars an hour. If ordinary people are not actively involved in shaping politics they will be ruled by powers fronted by one persona or another.    
Perhaps he will deliver an inspiring speech, maybe release what he says, and have a positive influence on the audience to improve our nation.  Those in the audience will have the means to do so.  Hopefully not via political contributions but via actions on issues that matter to them and perhaps many others who are not Wall Street types.
On the hand, if Mr. Obama gives a speech to a group of bankers, why should he offer to do it for a low fee? It is only important that the exact content of the speech and the fee both become immediate public knowledge. Sharing post-presidential tax returns would provide an important precedent as well.
The market for ex-presidents' speeches, it would seem, are very much like the real estate market: priced according to what the market will bear. Would any of us insist on accepting a LOWER price for our property than a great offer if we had the opportunity to sell it for an inflated amount?
I agree, it is disheartening that the "new normal" is for US Presidents to capitalize on their office and join the millionaire class. I think it is unlikely we will see another president like Jimmy Carter, who while he made nice living writing books after his office, spent most of his time continuing service through the admirable and constructive projects of The Carter Center. I'd love to see a law passed the forbids retired US Presidents from cashing in after office. This would prevent conflicts of interest and  attract candidates who are focused on serving, rather than cashing in.
Why he should need the money is an unanswered question.  Maybe he will donate the fee to something.  But there would be a bigger issue if he were still running for office.  I will be interested in the content of the speech, which should surely be factored in to any evaluation of his decision to make it.  
And the beauty of the current tax system is such that Mr. Obama likely will avoid paying much if any income tax on speaking fees when they are run through his foundation.  Likely any major changes to the tax system will not change that much.
This does not bode well for the "new generation of political leaders" that his foundation will "train and elevate," though I imagine that the foundation will not lack for corporate donors...
I don't really care about Obama's speaking fees.  I'm neither surprised nor shocked.  His language was progressive but his policies were corporatist. These are his people not the working or even the middle or upper middle class.  He has supported the banks and the bankers and traveled the world to support the TPP an agreement that expanded and perpetuated an system of arbitration that allows corporations to paralyze the democratically elected legislatures of any country if those legislatures don't agree with the desires of the corporate elites. <br/><br/>Saddened yes; surprised no.  Look no further than the corporatist"Democrats" to see why Trump was elected.
Hear, hear!<br/><br/>Since Trump's election, I have written to President Obama through his website three times to encourage him to take up residence in a congressional district currently held by a Republican and to run for the House of Representatives in 2018. (I suggested Virginia's second district, but I imagine there are others that would do as well.) The good he could do for the Democratic Party, for his own legacy and for the American people by engaging in such a way would eclipse anything he might accomplish through any foundation.
Optics in politics, unfortunately, can either be telling or misleading, depending on the truth that underlies them, which politicians themselves often conspire to hide. Which of these features applies to Obama, and in what measure, may not be known for a very long time.
This is private money going to someone who is not likely to run for any political office again. Eight years of decent work -- some good, some not.  Happy for him to be able to command such a speaking fee -- was earned IMHO.  And as a former president I am sure he has valuable insights. And as a now private citizen what he does and says are constrained by law (as are we all) and no longer public business. 
I am so thankful that there are still people who believe in the promise America, who serve without self-centered ambition, who truly care abourt the people they wish to serve.  In other words, I am thankful that Bernie Sanders, and people like him, are willing to serve.
Ruth Marcus in the Washington Post tried to make a distinction between writing a book, or taking pay for writing for a major magazine as Truman did, and getting paid for making a speech. I don't think there is a clear distinction.<br/>We live in a celebrity culture. Our current president got where he is today in part because of his role in The Apprentice. People who are rich and famous are accorded greater credibility because of their wealth and fame.<br/>I'm wondering about the other side of the equation. What do those wealthy bankers, some of whom I'm assuming are richer than the Obamas will ever be, want from the former president? Do they think he's going to tell them something that will inform their lives? Will his message help them make more money? Will he help them "understand" the "little people" who are declining in wealth and opportunity?<br/>The other question that has not been answered to my satisfaction is: what will President Obama do with that money? Bill Clinton was not a wealthy man, but wanted to mingle with the international upper crust as an equal. He devised a foundation that allowed him to do that and a rationalization that he was exploiting his wealthy associates to do good. Are Obama's motives similar? Or is it none of our business?
I great admirer of President Obama but I am concerned that his speaking to Wall Street for such high fee. I believe most people will have no objections to this if President Obama donated the money for causes to reduce income gap between 1% and the rest and the content of speech are made public. 
All the power to him!  I believe that Obama served with distinction and honor, but that's not to say that he didn't disappoint me on several occasions.  I accept that rarely does reality and the ideal perfectly mesh.  In making a living, the same holds true.  Unless you are donating your time to the most altruistic of non-profits, there is a compromise.  Every working stiff faces the questions: what does it pay and what do I have to do to earn it.
My feelings about this article are that former President Obama will use the revenue from his speeches for a good cause .<br/>He and Michelle are not the flamboyant, money hungry people that the media wants us to believe . They are honest , caring , concerned people.<br/>I feel they will be involved in projects  to energize young and destitute Americans to enrich their lives and improve their future .<br/>Give Obama time , he will again pleasantly surprise us .
He could easily put this to rest by donating a large portion of his fee to charity.  He clearly doesn't really need the money and by taking from the rich and giving to the poor he could set an excellent example in his work towards inspiring future leaders.  
"But why not elevate a new generation of political leaders and stay true to his values by giving his speech fees to his foundation and other charities focused on those goals?"<br/><br/>Do we know he isn't planning on doing so?
It’s not nice and perhaps not right to tell other people what to do with their money, even when they make a ton of it due to their work as a public servant. That said, it’s completely understandable how someone would balk at the idea of the Obamas raking it in, especially after what a similar approach cost Hillary Clinton and the image of the Democratic Party. We certainly can’t wait for Donald Trump to levy a special tax on ex-presidential earnings. However, we can hope the Obamas donate a large portion of their wealth to good causes. I think they will and imagine they know they’ve  made a mistake by not making that clear already.
Democrats are pros at eating their own. Part of politics is speech making. Neither Hillary or Obama should be criticized for making money because someone is willing to pay to hear their expertise. After the first 100 days of this administration It is apparent that business has no idea how government is run. Perhaps they need to hear more from our leaders.
Germany's Chancellor Angela Merkel lives in a modest apartment in a five-story apartment building in the Berlin Mitte district.<br/>There are no blocked streets, no police vans, and no retinue of armed guards. There are just two policemen watching over the entire apartment building. That's it. It's really quite amazing that the German Chancellor has relatively little protection at her residence, especially given the thousands of people who pass her apartment everyday on the way to Museum Island.<br/>She is sometimes seen doing her own shopping in a local supermarket.
I remember when Oprah donated $25,000,000 to her cause to help girls in South Africa who had been orphaned in the AIDS epidemic. $25,000,000, but still people were griping that she could have given more.  Her response was something to the effect of "I am not a saint."  But she had done immeasurable good to the girls whose lives she was touching. <br/><br/>President Obama is not a saint either, but he has spent his adult life giving and giving and giving.  He tirelessly gave the prime years of his life as a public servant, and nothing in his past suggests he is in jeopardy of losing the core of his immense decency now that he will be rewarded for his gift of oration which so many of us regaled in for the past decade or more. <br/><br/>By being a roll model of the highest caliber under the most glaring spotlight on the planet, he has come out the other side of a grueling eight year presidency as the world's biggest ticket celebrity.  Cantor Fitzgerald just wants the bragging rights to say that they have them as their keynote, not because he is in a position to affect policy.  He is not in the running to be a saint, so I truly believe he has every right to take whatever people want to pay him.
“President Obama will deliver speeches from time to time. Some of those speeches will be paid, some will be unpaid, and regardless of venue or sponsor, President Obama will be true to his values, his vision, and his record.”<br/><br/>Let him collect as much as he chooses from Wall Street. They can afford it. And allow him to do as he pleases with the money. He's earned that right. Now, if he tries to charge the same price for speaking to the Malala Fund, then we certainly have a problem with Mr. Shultz's claim. <br/><br/>At the same time, some of us have had the privilege of "hanging out" with someone who is very rich - a friend or family member - and understand completely the extreme change in perception when one is no longer forced to make decisions based on, "Can I afford this?" If Mr. Obama intends to be taken seriously by those of us who aren't millionaires, it is essential that he maintains some level of contact with those in the "Can I afford this?" situations. <br/><br/>So let's see if Mr. Obama is able to walk that fine line between the 1% and the 99%, shall we? Maybe we'll wind up witnessing a former president who is able to bridge that gap between Hillary and Bernie. 
Let's worry more about the billionaires in the White House who are trying to morally and financially bankrupt the country than the Obamas making some money from speeches and such.  <br/><br/>The important thing is that the former president cannot affect any policy decisions, regardless of how much he gets paid, especially as the GOP controls the Federal government.  The same GOP, it should be noted, would not let President Obama appoint a qualified candidate to the Supreme Court and was obstructionist in other ways as well.  <br/><br/>Yes, Obama should "stay true to his values," but, as they say, somebody's got to pay the rent.  I gather that the rent on his Washington DC home is over $20,000 per month and the presidential pension will not cover it.<br/><br/>Ivanka and Jared are renting in DC as well and their house rent is only slightly less than the Obamas'.  They are "working" for the federal government for "free."  But, as they say, there is no free lunch.  <br/><br/>The Chinese were/are falling all over themselves by offering trademark deals to the Trumps.  Let's also not forget that Jared Kushner's favorable deal with the Chinese to redevelop one of his buildings in Manhattan was scuttled only after the Times and others reported on it.  So, there is a cost to the Jared and Ivanka working for the government.<br/><br/>The point is Trump, Inc. is doing more damage to the country than Obama ever did while he was president.  <br/><br/>Let's not begrudge Obama making some money in his post-presidency days.
As Truman went home to Independence and Eisenhower went home to his farm in Gettysburg, it would have been nice if Bill and Hilary had gone home to Arkansas and if Barak and Michelle go home to Chicago. I think Obama called this "leading from behind."<br/>"Truman left the presidency and retired to Independence in January 1953. For the nearly two decades of his life remaining to him, he delighted in being 'Mr. Citizen,' as he called himself in a book of memoirs. He spent his days reading, writing, lecturing and taking long brisk walks. He took particular satisfaction in founding and supporting his Library, which made his papers available to scholars, and which opened its doors to everyone who wished to have a glimpse of his remarkable life and career.
Certainly it is troubling to see President Obama accept such a large sum. But there has been far less exploration of why any Wall Street firm would be willing to pay such an obscene amount for a single speech. We acknowledge that Mr. Obama is a very gifted and often compelling speaker, though his views are fairly well known. One possible explanation: to glean some insight into the Democratic Party's thinking for 2018 and 2020 and thus better able to direct Koch Brothers money.
The Clintons are obsessed with money and power, and ironically it cost Hillary the presidency.<br/><br/>As far as getting $400,000 from a Wall St. institution, this isn't really new behavior from Mr. Obama. He has always taken corporate money-- it helped get him elected twice. How is this a surprise? I think that it is the same reason he wouldn't allow single-payer advocates a seat at the table when he was working on his healthcare bill, but members of the pharmaceutical and health insurance companies were a part of the negotiation. <br/><br/>It would be a surprise if Bernie Sanders took that kind of money, which is one of his big appeals to people who care about money in politics.
We face a desperate need for principled leadership from within our political establishment.  The primary counterforce to the Trump juggernaut is not from the leaders of our political class. It is from the legions of ordinary Americans who marched on Saturday to demand action on climate change.  And filled town halls to demands "hands-off" the modest (and insufficient) benefits of Obamacare.  It is this public outcry that currently leads the way.  <br/><br/>Who among our political class truly understands the political moment - and will rise to the occasion we now face?  Who might join the ranks of Martin Luther King or even Eugene McCarthy or Robert Kennedy - to move persuasively and effectively to help lead a mobilized public.  So far, politicians are failing the respond to this moment.  <br/><br/>Yes, Jimmy Carter has acted in a principled manner as a post-president.  He deserves our respect.  The Obamas could play a leading role.  I hope they will.     
Bernie Sanders set an example. He financed his presidential campaign entirely from $27 contributions from the 99 percent. It made it easier for him to cricize thr "millionaires and billionaires" by showing he wasn't beholden to them. Perhaps he might have even won if he had had half the free press coverage Trump had, including from this paper. Obama could help unite the Democrats by following Sanders example and not speaking to Wall Street for huge sums or at least by donating all the fees to Vets or to environmental organizations or to Doctors Without Borders, etc. it doesn't matter if all the presidents except for Carter cashed in once leaving office. The Obamas certainly don't need the money. 
Better to "cash in" after leaving the Presidency, (with a speaking fee) than to endeavor to  re-write laws from day 1, as President to benefit the top 1%!<br/>We have a President now, who's only goal seems to be to dismantle Health Care for millions, and reduce his families taxes for personal gain.
I'm not sure how much Obama received for his speech. Nor am I happy about the extent to which huge money can be presented to politicians during and after their service.  However, I find the  So, as long as we are now expecting everyone to be completely true to their values to be somewhat disquieting. So since you seem to expect 100% fidelity to the values that politicians and others profess, then how about the Times agreeing to contribute 5% of your profit to charitable causes?  
This article illustrates a key reason that Democrats lose-- a drive for moral and intellectual purity from the key pundits that banishes and mistreats the strong leaders who also like money, power, women etc. Republicans don't do that. Forgive, forget and, most importantly, accept that money is a good thing. Capitalism is a good thing. It takes people's natural greed and directs it in a productive way.
I don’t understand all the hoo-ha being made over this paid speech. Obama is now a private citizen. He is entitled to do as he pleases. It seems the Times, and others, are holding him to a higher standard – why? He is not running for office, thus this speech or any future speech will not be in conflict with a policy agenda. And, some of his speeches will be unpaid. Why on earth should he give a free speech to Wall Street, of all places? Not that it matters, but perhaps the speech will address the Street’s privilege and responsibility to the 99%. It is also likely that the money will go to his foundation or charity. Sounds like a modern-day Robin Hood to me. 
Quite simply, the presidents speaking and receiving a fee is being overanalyzed. President Obama, has the right to earn a living.  To Work.  And, to accept less than what is offered just would not make sense.  Its what he chooses to do with the money that is interesting to me.<br/><br/>The President earned his way in the world.  I fear for the kids.
"But why not elevate a new generation of political leaders and stay true to his values by giving his speech fees to his foundation and other charities focused on those goals?"<br/>Not an unfair question.<br/>Did former President Obama call the NYT and say that he was not going to do that?
This article is in sharp contrast to Bret Stephen's article on climate change.  The argument is laid out with actual quotes and data.  Opinions are made as a result of this information.  Though we may disagree with the opinion, there is valid information to arrive at the author's conclusion.  I hope the NY Times makes this a requirement of all opinion pieces...
"It’s not beyond imagining that Mr. Obama could break with a practice whose ills he observed so astutely....".<br/><br/>Yes it is. It's beyond imaginable.<br/>Particularly because we are told "President Obama will be true to his values, his vision, and his record.”<br/>Which record?<br/>The one we grew to love while he was in the White House<br/> or the new one he appears headed towards as he waves goodbye leaving the Oval Office in January for the last time?
I would be happier to see more former presidents showing the example of people like Jimmy Carter. <br/><br/>On the other hand, it really doesn't surprise me that the Obamas have chosen the worldly road, it probably is the most rational thing to do. <br/><br/>This is why I think a life of faith like Carter is better -- though obviously not as financially and socially rewarding. 
Former President Obama should be held to a higher standard because he embodies a higher standard.  He demonstrates dignity, compassion, and intelligence.  Plus, a profound and inspiring ability to turn the other cheek, deflecting the untruths cast on him by our current president.  So, I, too, am disappointed with his willingness to associate, in this way, with Wall Street.
First of all, we don't know whether Obama plans to keep the money for himself or whether he will donate some or all of it. As I recall from his released tax returns, he and Michelle do make substantial charitable contributions (and not to buy 6 ft. portraits of themselves!).<br/><br/>Secondly, there is a major difference between Obama and Clinton here. Obama is out of office. The organizations that invite him to speak are not looking to get political favors from him. In contrast, Hillary Clinton gave her speeches at a time when she (and everyone else) knew full well that she was going to run for president again. So it is not unreasonable to think that some of the banks and organizations that paid her to speak were in fact hoping to buy political influence.  Clinton's claim that she would work for Main Street and not Wall Street as president rang hollow in view of those speeches. Her refusal to release any transcripts of them added to the sense of impropriety. Should she decide to give such speeches now as a private citizen, fine -- but she should not have done so as an aspiring candidate.<br/><br/>As for Obama, let's wait and see what kind of a past president he turns out to be. Given his high moral and ethical standards, I suspect he will essentially go the Carter route and try to do good things. Right now, it's only been 100 days: give him some time to get his bearings after 8 long, hard years.
In a political system in which success depends on money, lots of it, how can you expect one party to reject seeking it.  Only by changing the way elections are funded and run will there ever be a turn away from a dependency on big donors.  We can thank the Supreme Court for opening the flood gates and giving big money even more power than they had before.  <br/><br/>As for the Democratic Party and who they represent, forget their fund raising and just read their platform.  Compare their core values on health care, minimum wage, social security, consumer protection, the environment, labor laws, civil rights, voting rights, women;s rights education and  then decide.  Of the two Parties they are the peoples party.  <br/><br/>Abolish the Electoral College, end gerrymandering, adopt a one-person-one-vote standard nationally and properly educate the general public with classes in civics and history and science and we all know which direction the country would move.  <br/><br/>We have an ill informed, ill prepared and ill suited President because we have an ill informed and ill prepared electorate.  
I like Obama (though I've never met him). He's a smart guy with at least a basic/normal level of integrity and human decency.  But face it, like Macron, he's a creation of the establishment, or certain factions of it anyway.  Read Tufts' professor Michael Glendon's "National Security and Double Government".  Or Lewis Lapham's excellent leader, "The Servant Problem" in the Fall 2014 issue of his eponymous Quarterly.<br/><br/>Obama himself no doubt recognizes this - the interesting question is when he first realized it was true. Now he has kids to see through college and through life, so he first wants to make sure that he's in the $100 million plus net worth club - so as to set up various trusts and foundations to ensure multi-generation financial security and freedom (not to mention, ensuring that his future generations are part of the self-perpetuating elite).  The next step is to join the fun and games by aligning with one or more of the factions within the elite - again, potentially with the purest of intentions.<br/><br/>But he needs the money first - table stakes.
Ronald Reagan cashed in immediately after taking office with a $2 MILLION visit to Japan. In today's dollars that is just about $4 MILLION. <br/><br/>Why shouldn't Obama earn $400,00 for a speech? <br/><br/>He's not close to professional athlete salaries, or even the CEO of United.
A little wealth is a bad thing in this case but great wealth, i.e. enough to keep worry away from the personal financial door, is a great thing because it bestows great independence. Great wealth has been mishandled in an analogous way by the current occupant of the Oval Office. Oram's can and will do better. As a past president, Obama is not suited to very many jobs. He could try being a CEO somewhere but his training and instincts are to see profit in places other than the quarterly bottom line. He could practice law but that could open him I to other criticisms; he could run for a seat in the house like John Quincy Adams but that's not really on the cards today. He could be a public intellectual which is the path he's on but that requires the resources to be able to say things that afflict the comfortable and not worry about how to pay the bills for the next 30+ years. Don't look at one book deal or one speech as a guide. The foundation's existence says more than you might  know.
I'd rather see organizations with more money than sense pay someone like Obama to speak than simply to distribute the fees amongst the "job creators." Hopefully Obama can take the money and not have it affect his message. The question should be,  not how much Obama gets paid,  but whether he does good with the extravagant fees once he gets them.
I see no problem with what he gets paid to speak, in fact it gives me hope. If a group or company wants to pay President Obama 400K to talk to them maybe they will listen and act on what he has to say, and what he has to say is the key. 
The only thing the Democrats are out of touch with is solid messaging. Here is some of what they did for working class Americans: cut the deficit; the ACA; Lilly Ledbetter Act; unemployment insurance extensions; expanded Pell grants; got banks out of the student loan business; credit card reforms; expanded overtime protections for workers; cracked down on for profit colleges; expanded loans to small businesses; expanded CHIP. There is a lot more to add to this list and much of it will be gone under Trump. So, quit the meme that Democrats are out of touch with working class Americans. They were very much in touch but didn't tweet endlessly about it. 
The highest aspiration of an elected official should be to honor the trust placed in him or her by the public and not exploit it for personal gain.  This is especially true of the presidency.  To sell access to political power to the few casts a shadow on a presidency.  <br/><br/>Harry Truman did not enter or leave office a wealthy man. He placed his honor and that of the presidency beyond riches.  President Obama should meet with  Jimmy Carter for a considered discussion on how to be an ex-president.
The Democrats would seem to have forgotten their original mission of promoting the welfare of average Americans. Now, even the working class supports the Republicans. Taking large sums of money from corporate or banking interests for the simple expedient of making a speech at least gives the appearance of having gone over to the other side.  
That Wall Street firm sorely needs to hear from President Obama... about his values, his visions, his record! And the money will be well spent on Obama who will be, with Eric Holder, former Attorney General, focusing on GOP southern gerrymandering. Obama is still young and has many years of service to give America. US has a capitalist free market system; Obama is now a private citizen.  I wish him well, and look forward to how he can help democracy thrive against the forces of Republican gerrymandering. Liberals, progressives, and left leaning independents need to focus on the up coming midterm congressional elections instead of carping at a good man who is still a great leader. Why not wait until we hear his speech to judge what he says?
Please, Please, Mr. Obama served this country to the best of his ability for eight long years and he is now a "private citizen" he is entitled to direct his efforts in any way he sees fit. Were Clinton and Bush (Japan speech) attacked for post presidential personal financial gains to this degree?<br/>Note, there are many ways to hide payments legally whether paid in full or deferred over time or placed in off shore accounts!<br/><br/>Just ask his replacement for expert guidance on these issues. 
As far as I am concerned, what matters most is what he does with the money.  Barack Obama is in a truly unique to position to have a significant impact on the future of this nation.  If he can amass a fortune and use it to advance the cause of liberty and equality, that's great.  Full speed ahead.  If he can hobnob with billionaires and get them to be more socially responsible, more power to him.<br/><br/>It takes money to have an impact.  Gandhi would have a tough time getting high ratings in today's America if he couldn't buy enough air time. <br/><br/>If President Obama can become super rich, I can't think of a better foil to offset the vultures of Wall Street.  Look what Rupert Murdoch has done to America with his money.  I hope he makes zillions of dollars and used them to do good in this world.  I say give him a chance.  That's what we keep hearing people say about Trump.  
"And it shows surprising tone deafness, more likely to be expected from the billionaires the Obamas have vacationed with these past months than from a president keenly attuned to the worries and resentments of the 99 percent."<br/><br/>It's this "tone deafness" that gets me.  I believe our former President and his family were decent, authentic, people of integrity.  Which makes his quick acceptance of this speech--on TOP of a hugely enriching book deal--so troubling and so uncharacteristic.<br/><br/>So I can't disagree with anything in this excellent editorial.  Nothing more needs to be said, except for one point I'd like to pick up on and expand on.   If President Obama is starting a foundation, I agree, why not donate every single bit of proceeds from speeches to this foundation?<br/><br/>I simply cannot imagine anything more fitting than exploiting the system to make the system support the care and nurture of a new generation of Democrats.  <br/><br/>There would be a rich irony in taking what many perceive as tainted money and using it for a higher purpose, to find, train, and elect Democrats who could form the vanguard of getting Citizens' United overturned.
Influence has always been purchased. Former presidents always wanted to do right by their families and live well in retirement, and always found ways to do so -- well before Gerald Ford.<br/><br/>Interesting that nothing was written in this editorial about Dubya's singular unwillingness to cash in.
Are people offended that Obama is talking to Wall Street or getting $400,000? Doesn't it matter what he says? Democrats have got to reconcile with the facts that campaign contributions are the coin of the election realm. And businesss big and small create jobs. America needs thriving businesses.  And sometimes regulations to contain greed or criminality in the name of profit. 
I am outraged by this cheap,undeserved shot! Instead of focusing on a current Presidential cabinet filled with recent Goldman Sachs executives dismantling every financial protection afforded consumers, every regulation that prevents the financial system from imploding again, every regulation to destroy the environment to advance capitalist greed--the Times instead has gone after an ex-President whose message did not change with the price of his speech.<br/><br/>Does the Times criticize authors awarded millions in advance who show up on its best sellers list? No; its listing helps sell 100s of 1000s of books! Its stories celebrate CEOs and athletic coaches paid millions. Even cooks and scientists who earn millions from their work.  <br/><br/>For the ex-President, the issue should not be the money, but the message. This is patronizing liberalism (and white paternalism), rife with a double standard. Guilt by association has often knocked down successful African-Americans--in this case, an ex-President who as a private citizen has a right well earned to the finest things that life may offer through friends and opportunities. As Adam Clayton Powell told a Harlem audience of a Congressional junket to Paris, he flew "first class." The working families in Harlem got it. "First class," they echoed. Their self determination included the Best, understanding it opened up denied opportunities--they never saw climbing the crystal stairs (see Langston Hughes, "Mother to Son") as selling out!
President Obama is no longer in office. Accepting fees for giving speeches is fine as far as I am concerned. <br/><br/>Why don't we concentrate on prosecuting the criminals in office including our great con artist president.
Thank you for this editorial, albeit about thirty years overdue.  It has been a long time since a politician I fully supported has disappointed me as much as I was when I read about Obama's fee.  As you state, it serves to reinforce the not inaccurate view that DC pols are in a world separate and apart from the people.  I have no doubt that, at least as much as the email non-scandal, Clinton's speech-making doomed her candidacy.  If Dems are to have any chance of turning the tide against corporatism, they must walk the walk.  Talking the talk is not going to get it done, especially if they walk in the opposite direction.  This is rich fodder for the demagogues.
Obama is not going to run for office again.<br/>At the time HRC was accepting large speaking fees she was  expected to be a candidate for president.<br/>Groups paying her fees expected something in return when she became president.<br/>That HRC would not make public the transcript of her speeches is suspect.<br/>The group that paid Obama's large fee do not expect something in return.<br/>There is a difference in the two cases.
It seems a bit like sacrilege to compare Mr. Obama or Mrs. Clinton to Mr. Trump. That said, it may be true that Mrs. Clinton's speaking fees helped to sink her candidacy. How ironic that for some politicians being paid what the market will bear is viewed as a negative when Mr. Trump is praised, petted, and admired for his wealth. The Trump wealth was often gotten by stiffing the little guy, stiffing the government, and declaring bankruptcy. All Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Obama have done is to take a check from the 1%, who obviously will not suffer a moment for parting with that money. 
Au Contraire!! <br/><br/>Why should Obama be where you draw the line? Why should he be held to a higher standard than those who came before him, and certainly, our current  grifter in chief and his nepotistic advisors - talk about keeping all the money and power in the family... even his tax breaks benefit himself, if we ever got to see 45's tax returns, but right  they don't matter because he won. <br/><br/>You said nothing about the Clinton's, and Dick Cheney's Halliburton ties went uncommented upon, but the first black President should give his money away?<br/>For what? Every Senator and ex President commands huge speaking fees as a matter of course but Obama should give his away? <br/><br/>Oh the hypocrisy. 
Times, you were silent on this issue when Hillary Clinton continued to deliver speeches for hundreds of thousands of dollsrs while making a bid for the presidency.<br/><br/>But if the Obamas can make some money after 8 years in the White House, you chide them for not being role models in turning the money down.<br/><br/>The only thing that could possibly be more outrageous and sanctimonious would be for the Clintons to join you in criticizing the Obamas.
All perfectly legitimate points, and let's hope Mr. Obama reads this and takes heed.  Frankly, though, I'm much more concerned about presidents (and their families) who don't wait until leaving office before cashing in.
The main difference between Dems and Republicans is that Dems take their cut first and then tell everyone else how to share what remains while Republicans take their cut first and then let everyone else fight over what remains.  
It would seem the lucrative book deals would suffice for an income of reportedly $65 million for the Obamas in the post presidency life. Why is anyone surprised? He continued and expanded the wars in the Middle East, along with expanding surveillance of Americans. He jailed no bankers. And he didn't stop the pipeline until it was nearly finished. I'm no fan of the Republicans, but I don't think the present Democrat party offers Americans much of a choice. As far as post elected office ethics, I don't see anyone in either party from any office that offers an example that is different in spirit than what Obama is doing. They all are into cushy lobbying jobs, banking etc. The system is rife with corruption..swapping board seats with government administrative positions, etc, corporations run our government now. Why is anyone surprised at what Obama is doing considering how the game is played? Anyone paying attention would realize big corporations got him to Washington..pharms, big ag, insurance, and ..Goldman Sachs. Now that last one says it all. 
It is sad to see the former POTUS damage his brand by taking in such amounts, even if they go to his charities/a foundation, which as the article points out creates conflicts like the Clintons have experienced.<br/><br/>Rightly or wrongly, the public perception is that once a public personna starts accepting such fees, they become beholden to those amounts, and are sell-outs; a problem the Carters have not been afflicted with.<br/><br/>Corporations/organizations who pass out these large speaker fees are well aware that people who accept the amounts naturally become much more hesitant about criticizing said corporations/organizations, for fear of being assailed as hypocrites. 
Obama basically believes in the system, although he wants to tweak it to make it better.  He knows it is far from perfect, but he thinks it is tweakable (which may no longer be true).  But part of the system is for celebrities to be overpaid and for political celebrities to give overpaid speeches.  He could decide to live modestly and give his speaking fees to charity, but this would constitute an attack from the left on the system; although he sometimes sounded like he wanted to do this at the beginning of his presidency, this was not where he was at.   
Big, six and seven figure payoffs for a "speech" after a public official leaves office has the appearance of the collection of deferred compensation for favors rendered while that public official was in office.<br/><br/>Unlike the days of President Grant, when ex-Presidents got little or nothing after they left office, and were left in financial straits, today's Presidents get Presidential pensions.<br/><br/>Better to stick to writing books than delivering big payoff speeches.
Moral considerations aside, the very capability to understand the basic antagonism between the super rich 1% and the struggling mass of 99%  and still navigate successfully through this wide gulf with rare audacity of hope to serve the common public does prove that Obama has been a rare person who  combines professional careerism with public leadership qualities. 
Yes. 
So, now it's ok for the market to determine Obama's pay.<br/><br/>What then is the liberal reply when conservatives use that excuse?
So maybe Obamas quest to help the 99% was a farce. That's how most of the people who didn't vote for him saw it. He said what he said to get elected. The people who he professed to care about, the middle class, the poor and certainly the minorities were decimated on his watch. The wealthth did extremely well. What you are seeing now is a man who can no longer be protected by the press as the press has moved on because Obama has no more capital to give them. You are now seeing the Obama that's been theee all along without his clothes. And for the record, if someone would offer Bernie the money, he'd take it. Just like he did when Hillary bought him his mansion on the lake in Vermont for dropping out and supporting her. I know that to be true. I live in Vermont and unlike most of the people who fell in love with him, we just want him to leave.
Question is what did Pres Obama do or not do because he did not want to offend the people who pay these massive speaking fees?
Criticism of Obama for coziness with Wall St.  is racism. Criticism of Clinton for coziness with Wall St. is sexism. Apparently the only people who can be criticized for pay-to-play politics are white males. The grim, unthinking illogic of neoliberal identity politics. We can't be racist or sexist, we have plutocrats of every color and gender!
Add shame, obscene, immoral
We all know Trump is a plutocrat who is all about enriching himself and his family. Why state the obvious? The NY Times and the Washington Post skewer Trump on a daily basis.<br/><br/>But, the general notion was and is that Obama is somehow.  However, he's certainly not. The fact that his defenders feel the need to mention Trump in Obama's defense validates this article.
I'm an admirer of him and I don't feel betrayed. If someone were to give me $400, 000 I'd take it in a New York minute.
Wait and see. This brilliant and compassionate man is not done yet.
Or maybe it's not about belonging but about the security that money brings to him and his family. Security is not about accumulating goods necessarily but about knowing things like your family will have a roof over their heads, food to eat, etc. <br/><br/>David, I don't know your story. But perhaps you've never truly been on the margins economically, which Obama has been, growing up and as a young man.  I can tell you that as a person who grew up poor and fatherless, security is part of what drives me to work. It's not about belonging -- I don't really care about titles , who drives what car, or living in a certain neighborhood. 
So set up the darn foundation and have money paid for speeches be donated directly to the foundation. Isn't 65m enough $ for them to scrape by on....he gets full salary for life paid by the taxpayers and other large sums for office, staff. Of course those Versace gowns are kind of pricey....
Why can't Democrats support the financial system ? <br/><br/>What makes you think that Obama wants us not to have a banking system ? <br/><br/>The anti trade guy is his successor. 
I don't think earning a $65 million book deal means Americans love blacks. The liberal media adores the Obamas. There are class divisions among the black community. Just read "Locking Up Our Own" by James Foreman Jr.
Of course Obama is free to make money. It just highlights his failure to elevate the standard of living of those he claimed were victims of "injustice" and unfairness and for whom he cried on the campaign trail.  Quite the contrary: his policies were counter-productive and hurt the less successful in America. Would he admit to this. No way! The narrative does not include the truth
BW:  perhaps Americans, rather than being racist, merely reject the entitlement economy and see that as doing much more harm than good. The last 8 years could be considered as proof.
2008 was one of the worst economic collapses to happen in the USA. Obama bailed out the banking industry knowing he would benefit from speaking there. Democrats are not much better than Republicans.
That's because no other president ever made such a big deal about how greed spurs economic injustices. Doesn't anyone read anymore? Or watch videos of the statements Obama made before and during his presidency? Former president Obama (and how it pains me to say that the is no longer the president) cannot be compared to other former presidents on this issue. And to imply that racism is at the core of this discussion is offensive. He was unlike all of them on social justice issues. He was brave and stubborn. That's how we got the health care ball rolling. But on the Wall Street speeches fee (not the book deals, mind you), he opened himself up to valid criticism. 
News flash:  the Obamas were one percenters LOOOOONNNNGG before they got to the White House.  Michelle worked at a bit law firm while hubby was a state and then US Senator.  While that's is not millions, it is enough to put on the top 1% easily.  And now they're cashing in on their status as ex-First Family for even bigger bucks.  Personally, I don't have a problem with that.  Nothing wrong with getting paid to make speeches despite what some hand-wringers here might think.  They're just doing what they need to do to afford that enormous house in the Kalorama neighborhood of DC.
I guess if the book publisher offered them that much, they should have said no thanks. We'll do the tremendous amount of work it takes to write books, but we don't want to be paid. And the same to wall Street for their offer of payment for a keynote speech at a major conference where his expertise and experience is perfect? Maybe we should wait and see how they use that money before being so judgmental.
if you want to be able to compete with Republican big money, you have to raise money; unless you are independently wealthy<br/>The latter did not get their money by dining out with the common folk, so this notion that Trump is not beholden to money because he has a lot of it himself is nonsense.  He is just savvy enough to know what sells.<br/>Big Money is corrupting the political process, so at the end of the day, it's choosing who is less damaging rather than who is good.
Of course the notion that Trump is not beholden is nonsense - and people were extremely gullible and deluded not to see through it immediately. But they will. And this can be to the Democrats' advantage if they start to reconnect back to ordinary voters - but mean it, not just talk it up. There are some Democrats (I believe Eric Schneiderman is one) who have been working toward legally challenging Citizens United with the hope of overturning it. Gorsuch's presence on the Court just set that goal back but that doesn't mean we give up on it as a goal.<br/><br/>At the end of the day, the more we keep going down the path of "To compete with corruption and selfishness we have to be corrupt and selfish ourselves, just a little less so" the more we destroy the fabric of our nation. And it will eventually catch up to us. I say this as a historian by training and trade. I'm not looking for perfect but we can do better than this. We must do better than this. We need leaders of courage and vision and integrity to do so, though. A rarity, I know.
What about Trump's gains DURING his presidency??
Served? How about sought and worked very hard to obtain?
Given what a disaster his regime was, I think it obvious he did not follow input from the GOP
Got my facts wrong; sorry for the fake news. George Bush, Sr was still president when he threw up on his Japanese host and he didn't get paid a million bucks for it. I can't find any ex president who got $1,000,000 either.<br/>Sorry 'bout that.
Stever65, you weren't totally wrong. Ronald Reagan was paid $2 million for two speeches in Japan, according to an article in the New York Times. Meanwhile George W gave about 200 speeches in 6 years earning about $100-175K for each speech.
"Entitled to make a living." Talk about a corruption of language!<br/><br/>The janitors cleaning up the room after his speech will be "making a living." President Obama will be taking a payoff for services rendered.
@Nelson: Well said! I agree 100%
Democrats didn't care, Bernie and his dumb supporters made it a big issue. So long as there's no evidence that he's being bought out and induced to support reckless economic policy's  I could care less. Reading Clinton's  speeches made me want to vote for her more since she was literally telling Wall Street she wanted to regulate them and supported the fight against climate change.
It is rather interesting to note that during the majority of the two terms Obama was in office, elections that occurred at various times and government levels throughout the country, the democrats lost over 900 seats at the local, state and federal levels including both houses and the Presidency.   When they started accepting large amounts of corporate cash, the vision for the parties base was replaced by no vision at all.<br/><br/>The democrats started "disaffecting" many of their voters a long time ago and the results confirm it.
The difference is the perception of pay for access during an election cycle.
Absolutely, you cannot accept large donations from Wall Street(especially after 2008)and still be categorized as you described.  Obama was always really a center/right politician.
It wasn't the GOP, it was Bernie. Bernie pulled support away from Clinton with his temper tantrum over not being the nominee. He claimed the primaries were "rigged," and all his millennial supporters fell for it hook, line and sinker. He also weakened Clinton's campaign by deepening resentment among his supporters when he refused to end his campaign which created an opening for Russia to capitalize on that resentment and through their hacking pull support away from Clinton.
I could not agree more and I'm ready to cancel<br/>my subscription,
And Clintons have pulled in over 150 million since 2001<br/><br/><a href="http://www.cnn.com/2016/02/05/politics/hillary-clinton-bill-clinton-paid-speeches/" title="http://www.cnn.com/2016/02/05/politics/hillary-clinton-bill-clinton-paid-speeches/" target="_blank">http://www.cnn.com/2016/02/05/politics/hillary-clinton-bill-clinton-paid...</a>
I'm upset by it.  But that's not the point.
Trump was paid 1.5 million,
He could have said "Ok, I will not send any of you Wall Street crooks to jail, just pay a fine that is chump change to you and paid by your company or insurance."  That seems to be worth a bit more than $400K.
After all,  with Hillary and the glaring crony capitalism of Trump, optics do have meaning.
No influence?  I beg to differ.
Whose children?<br/>What message?
Nobody's going to offer Bernie Sanders  $400,000 for a speech. But if there were such an offer, you can bet your life he would take it.
When did he "rail" against the wealthy? It NEVER happened. It is possible to be in the 1% and to be concerned about income inequality. <br/><br/>It WASN'T a front page story when either Bush or Reagan did it. 
I am afraid whether one likes it or not, one of Trumps constant themes was that the "system was rigged". and he ultimately got elected for it.  Politicians that accept large amounts of money at any point in their career can provide influence for those whose interests wish to be served and I am surprised you still have ignored that fact. With the confirmation of Citizens United, America has become the poster child for such activity at the expense of the vast majority of its citizens.
Trump et al might be worthy of outrage, but the (supposed) lack of outrage generated in response to him (disputable given the massive marches that have taken place since his election) is not determinative of the appropriateness of outrage to be directed to Obama. Trump and Obama are independent actors. As such, the responses to the actions of each must be considered independently.
I believe that he's doing this also.  However why is any of this your (collectively)business. He is doing a legitimate job for pay. What that pay is, is only between him  and the person/group who is hiring him
There is a person currently in the White House who demonstrates every day that he does not have the best interests of anyone other than himself and his family at heart. For the eight years of the Obama administration, it was impossible to avoid the sense that the Republucan party didn't have the best interests of Americans at heart. Now that Republicans are the governing party, it's obvious they've given little thought to anything except upper income tax cuts and packing the Supreme Court with right wing ideologues. In word and deed, both the president and his Republican congress demonstrate virtually no concern for the wellbeing of the American people whose image they invoke at every opportunity. Yet here we are arguing about whether the Democrats are good enough. It's amazing -- has the Republican Party's hypocrisy become so normalized that we rarely stop to notice it?
There are plenty of people committed to a cause, an idea, or a way of life who are so enthusiastic about what they embrace that they wound willingly give a speech to promote what they believe in free of charge. Indeed, even if $400,000 or more were offered, they would reject the fee in order to highlight the sincerity and conviction of their beliefs.
I totally agree!!
Do Al Gore or Di Caprio drive Priuses, or do they fly around in jets and ride in limos? How many houses does Bernie own? Didn't Warren cash a $400,000.00 check for teaching one class?? Hypocrisy is widespread on the left
.. 400,000 not 400.00 
I am afraid despite the hundreds of seat losses they have suffered  in recent years decimating the party in the process, it is obvious even today, the democrats still haven't learned.
Ha. I will not hold my breath for that. Will you?
A thief has just robbed your neighbor of ten of thousands of dollars (car, jewelry, sterling silver, computers), will you not rend your garments after he comes to your house and steals your one computer and big screen television? The grand wrongdoing of one doesn't justify or even minimize the minor wrongdoing of another. It is specious reasoning to determine the rightness or wrongness of an action by comparing it to how rightly or wrongly another person has acted. Serious wrongdoing by one does not legitimize the wrongdoing, however small, of another.
I agree. Probably 
Jimmy Carter (and his foundation) has taken more than 50 million dollars from fundamental Islamic groups, don't kid yourself.
He seemed unwilling to accord that same standard - earn as much as he or she can - to the titans of Wall Street. That is the hypocrisy: when it comes to CEOs, hedge fund managers et al, reigning in is necessary, market demand for their talent be damned; when it comes to a former president (who railed against the aforesaid,  the one percenters), by all means charge and receive what the market will bear i.e. what the aforesaid are willing to pay you, and previous political positions and "empathies" be damned.
He is absolutely entitled to the same compensation as his peers. Only it is hoped that, given his commitment to the oppressed and to those whose interests are eclipsed by the wealth and power of the one percenters, he would resist the temptation to benefit personally from those very same people he identifies as being the oppressors and the one percenters.
Those top CEO are elected professionals and compensation is set by the Board. They can loose a lot if company doesn't perform and the deciding voice there are ordinary people - shareholders. What are the achievements of Mr. Obama for which he is being paid that amount of money? What he has created based on his knowledge and education - Nothing. Don't compare achievers with the guy who was raised and made a President by Democratic elites.
None of those in Wall Street were publicly elected officials supposed to be held to a higher standard.  Not that they are.
Your comment is noted and rejected. Selective hearing at best.<br/>His predecessor and his successor are two of the worst presidents in history. The new one is already there in 100 days. Though not a single one would have to pass to recognise that.
well said, well done.  I couldn't agree with you more...
Of course it can be viewed as corrupt, and it will be by millions of voters.<br/><br/>It looks like a payoff for Obama's agreeing not to prosecute the titans of Wall Street who crashed the economy.
Neither Bush cashed in, in fact neither did Reagan or Nixon.<br/><br/>Clinton, that's a whole other story. Must be a liberal thing.
Jimmy Carter has taken millions from fundamental Islamic groups.  No one wants to hear him speak.
Are you kidding?  Remember when W spoke at a Wounded Warriors fundraiser and took a $100k speaking fee for doing so?  It was probably discounted because he was the president who sent them to war.
Read the article in the Intercept about where the Cantor money really went. The insurance payout that was split between the principals and didn't go to the victims families. There are no heroes in this tale.
So many have hopes that Obama will be better than that.
i think you are missing the point that this is the guy who told us "at some point i think you have made too much money" and is anti growth, anti capitalism, pro welfare state, but is fine cashing in and hence is a hypocrite.  make all you want just don't create and support policies that don't let me do the same. 
Does he really have to choose to either give paid speeches or speak for free to worthy causes? And how is undervaluing his expertise setting a good example? Your rule book sounds dated.
No, it's  called corruption.
That is exactly what the furor  is about, that "Obama took to the speech circuit, just like every other ex president". He set a higher standard as president, and one would Hope that contribution can be enduring.
Obama is far better morally speaking  than Reagan, Clinton, and W. So we do have a reason to expect a higher standard from him.
"I suspect that democrats do care about these people..."<br/>Yes, I suppose in their heart of hearts they care deeply. But their plans don't work - they only deepen poverty, resentment, despair and violence.<br/>The people they "cared" about felt this,  angrily  turned away, abandoned the democrats and elected Trump, for better or worse.
He gets a handsome pension, has other sources of income, and has many perks,...... "not independently wealthy" .....what are you talking about?
If Obama is not independently wealthy, how did he afford a beachfront Hawaiian mansion? Who paid for that??
This sounds like Bill Clinton saying  he's got bills to pay! Obama has a book deal with 60 million and he needs another 400,000 to "make a living"?
What Republican gets hammered when they make money??  Pure and utter fantasy.   The base lauds and applauds them, the Democrats get scrutinized when they make a dime.  It's ok by me if any former President, First Lady, Athlete, Musician get's paid by corporations for speeches.  And what about the Osteens??  Are their speeches free.... I think not!
Context matters. Haven't seen Republicans "pilloried " for the speech money, it is about the selling of  influence and for ethical lapses.
I like your style, John.
Comparing the "crooked man who calls himself president" is an insult to Obama.
She wasn't the president! We are a capitalistic society. What we value, we pay for. Presidents get paid more than Secretaries of State.
Are we talking about Obama or Ghandi..!? <br/><br/>To all of you who feel you somehow have any right to judge him, or tell him what he should be doing or how: You Don't.
He could speak to wall street for free, but why should he? Why shouldn't they have to "value" him and pay him anywhere near what the prestige and value he provides to them from hearing directly from him.<br/><br/>Do you expect Elton John or Bono to perform for free? Who else do you expect to waive remuneration? Your doctor because it would be more meaningful if they just wanted to cure you for the good of it and not to make a living?
You are so correct. Who is fighting for healthcare, higher minimum wage, childcare, public education, better and fairer policing, justice for all, funding of SS, regulations around safety, air quality, funding of infrastructure so more Flints can be avoided. The list goes on and on. What are the Republicans doing, scaring people into believing that there is carnage in the streets and friendly countries taking advantage of poor, defenseless USA. 
He has never done the Democratic Party any good beyond promoting himself and getting elected.  Think of all the governships and seats it lost while he was in the Oval Office.
Your broad sweeping statements say that you put words and deeds into people's mouths with little regard for reality. You raise some real issues and concerns but then fail to understand that many democrats whomever they supported believe that income inequality is a HUGE issue. That globalization and automation are real issues. But just saying "no" isn't going to get us where we need to be from a public policy perspective.<br/><br/>I'm a black woman out of foster care who is very liberal. I also know I live in a capitalistic society. What we value, we pay for.<br/><br/>This idea that someone is "chummy" for receiving fair value for their time is offensive. It was offensive when Bernie lied about Hillary and it's even uglier now that we see what real corruption and inside dealing looks like.  Elton John receives $1 million for a concert. Does that mean he's a "chum" of every single person for whom he performs?<br/><br/>Obama is a thought leader. They are paying to hear his thoughts. 
LOL.  Have to laugh at all the altruism being attributed to this president.  Easier than admitting he's just another Chicago politician.
What is corrupt about earning a living giving a speech? The Bushes have a lot of business interests in Saudi Arabia, Trump has business interests all over the world and is reported to have close banking ties with Russia. Now Obama no longer president is being chastised for what - commanding a large speaking fee because he is 1 of only 4 living US ex-presidents in the world.  <br/><br/>What would people think is okay - giving away his time?  Perhaps talking only about cats and dogs. He is in the big leagues now and has opportunities to use his influence for good. To do that he has to hang with the movers and shakers. He has no political influence to peddle only causes to push? What is the big deal -  It confounds me.
Except. he's already *been* POTUS. What policy influence are they buying? none.
Perhaps you should withhold your criticism until you've seen the text of the speech.  You seem to believe you know it already.
Er, hold on there.  "we should not have allowed this practice probably ever"?  Who is the "we" who should be able to forbid a private citizen from contracting to provide services for some business?  And why should "we" be able to interfere?  And why precisely is revolving door job, books, etc ok, whereas revolving door job, speeches etc is corrupt?<br/><br/>If you haven't noticed the upswing in public displays of racism and sexism since November 8, and the number of people who will tell you that black people are to blame for Trump's election, then it's pretty clear that the person who hasn't learned from this election is you, not us.
It's none of anyone's business what he does with his money.. <br/><br/>What does this man have to do to satisfy some people, walk on water!!?
He can do whatever he wants with it.  It's payment for services rendered.  He earned it, he can spend it any way he sees fit.  Who are you to say it depends?
Why should he?  You didn't ask any other former president to set a new standard, why ask him?  Why shouldn't he get the same rewards as every other former president?
Exactly.  Thank you! What hypocrisy from the New York Times.
Ask the current occupant of the WH how much money he "needs", what kind of answer do you think you'd get (if any)?  Nonsense!<br/>Is anyone really that interested in the Obamas' "image"?  They've established a lasting "image" after 8 years of public service.  What have the critics actually DONE for their country?
How do you know the bulk is going to charity? That has never been reported. 
The $65 million from book deals should be enough to tide the Obamas over in their retirement years.  Funds from speeches channeled to their foundation and charities is simply the right thing to do.
Because that's the kind of man he is, and:<br/><a href="http://rare.us/rare-news/former-president-obama-donated-over-1-million-to-charity-during-his-eight-years-in-the-white-house/" title="http://rare.us/rare-news/former-president-obama-donated-over-1-million-to-charity-during-his-eight-years-in-the-white-house/" target="_blank">http://rare.us/rare-news/former-president-obama-donated-over-1-million-t...</a>
Um, we tried. The Supreme Court said no. 
Or maybe it has something to do with the fact that the Democratic Party, including its leaders Hillary Clinton and former President Obama, has made "income inequality" and vilifying Wall Street standard rallying cries.<br/><br/>It's their hypocrisy, and everyone knows it.
Obama's not our dad.<br/><br/>I've never understood the insistence of some Americans that the President be some kind of magical parent instead of a highly competent and empathetic politician.
If we’re ever going to have any credibility when criticizing Trump, his cronies, and the rest of the Republican Party we need to be honest and critical about the actions of those on the left as well. Otherwise, we come off as the same type hypocrites and political opportunists we accuse our opponents of being. Acknowledging and recognizing the false equivalency often used to compare Trump and Obama doesn’t mean we should ignore Obama’s failings either. We should be able to walk and chew gum at the same time on this. 
Kostya,<br/><br/>I agree, and one of the worst is to be a celebrity without money. That is, to be totally exposed without a space to retreat and to have it assumed that you're wealthy when you're not.  Many previous presidents were independently wealthy, Obama was not.<br/><br/>The money is unbelievable, but I don't begrudge it to Obama, his wife, and especially his daughters. The girls will enjoy many advantages, but a normal adolescence and adulthood will not be among them.
"Imagine a former president giving a speech for $1000 at an organization that is worthy of his words"<br/><br/>but how would Obama become a bllioinaire (or having the lifestyle of one) on only $1000 a speech? That was not enough for Hillary. Why would it be enough for Obama?
You're out of your mind. There's nothing wrong or illegal about Obama giving a speech for $400,000. If people want to pay him that much money to hear him talk, all the more power to him. They're going to be hearing his liberal ideas and thoughts so it's in the democratic parties best interest anyway that he give these speeches. Would you think it wrong if someone offered Obama $400,000 to give his opinion on  a law being passed and served as a legal consul? That would be called having a job. There's nothing wrong or illegal about people paying the man for his skills. You need to re-calibrate your own mind about what is legal and right.
Nope. I don't like it but he's not running for anything so he can't be making campaign promises, we don't need to see this speech.
Truman and Carter were of a different generation. YOu know, the generation that actually wrote their own autobiographies or the books they claimed to (no "ghost writers"). 
Thank you for finding &amp; sharing that quote.<br/><br/>Maybe he'll give much of it to charity of other good once his daughters are taken care of...like Mr. Gates.
Appearance of cashing in?
"If someone is willing to pay and no one is hurt"... think such a concept is even possible?
I guess that somewhere along a very long chain -- perhaps. But say it were Bill Gates making the offer. I can not see where there might be injury.
The chain is not as long as you believe. It will quickly arrive at your pension fund in about two steps, if you care! It will also lead to unfair deals, lobbying, etc. and may even make our job untenable, again if you care. It is 'legalized' corruption, everyone knows it. And I am certainly not blaming Obama for it. One market-based option is to document every public word of past govt. officials and put it up on the web immediately.
maybe he should worry how accepting $400,000 (and a lot more in the future) looks like to someone who once played an important role in regulating it (i.e., the appearance of conflict of interest). <br/><br/>What about the role of precedent on future leaders and its impact on their ability to regulate and govern as well as the legitimacy of the political system? How can electorate possibly trust political leaders to govern and regulate industries knowing they are in hoc to special interests who, in the future, will be paying them tons of money for speeches? this goes simply beyond cynicism. It undermines the democratic process. 
"President Obama trusts the $400K in his own hands more than in those of the Wall Street bankers..."<br/>Except that the money with the bankers and now with Obama does not really belong to either. Heard of trading on insider information?
Who cares where he puts the money? It's his and he earned it. Would you be mad if Obama had earned the $400,000 differently by serving as legal counsel to a law firm? Or made $400,000 by selling tupperware? Either way he is simply being paid to give a service, it's called a job. It's not illegal and it's not immoral. Why should he accept less than what someone is willing to pay him?
What in the world does it matter where he spends his money? He earned it himself. You weren't concerned about where he spent his money earned from being President. Why do you suddenly care now? What he's doing now is called having a job. More power to Obama if he can make $400,000 grand a pop for imparting his liberal ideas and thoughts to whoever is willing to pay him. He's gonna rub them in the liberal direction which is the right direction to be going anyway. 
the problem is not the money but how it undermines the democratic process. How can any politician regulating an industry be expected to not be influenced by those interests knowing full well that they can offer him hundreds of thousands after he leaves office? Does that not undermine the legitimacy of the political process and democracy itself? 
There is a difference between being "bought" and being paid what you are worth...
The problem with cashing in on your presidency after office is that it creates the appearance of impropriety that perhaps you’re enacting (or failing to enact) policies while president that will benefit you financially as an ex-president. It’s the same reason why I abhor the revolving door between government officials and lobbying firms. Many of those officials may never return to public roles but some will advocate for issues while in government so they can be rewarded once they move into the private sector. 
Joel Osteen is worth 40 million bucks.<br/><br/>Think of all the poor people he could help if he followed the teachings of Jesus.
Because she's incompetent, and insane.
People have no trouble criticizing Trump, though
Like most Americans you cannot spot a true fraud when you see one. Or did you not hear who won on Nov. 8th 2016?
Trump and Bush both had head starts.  No way Obama can catch up.
what heart...there is an empty space where Wall Street people had a heart before it was replaced with money and power.
examine the facts Maggie - privilege is earned and deserved.
Yes. I agree. Let's hold our Presidents to the same standards as athletes and entertainers.
Probably with the Republicans calling him a Communist, he felt that unsettling the bankers during the worst crisis since the Great Depression was a bad idea.<br/>Because strangely enough, we need banks in this country.<br/><br/>Now explain to me why everyone who thinks Obama was easy on the banks voted for the Congress that did absolutely NOTHING to go after the bankers?
Didn't somebody buy Ronald Reagan a house?
Why? Why do you hold him to a different standard, pray tell?
Also, many people seem to forget that it was HRC who brought suit against Citizens United, and lost. <br/><br/>So yes, CC skews the game, but since those are now the rules, Dems have no choice but to play by them too.
Exactly and obviously the New York Times has a problem with the former "Black" President getting paid but has no problem with the current know-nothing poser ripping off the taxpayers at every turn.  Hypocrites.
Harry Mazal – do you know for a fact that he does not? And, why do you think he owes anybody an explanation?
Oh please.  I'm not surprised you had the gall to write such nonsense, after all, I bet you think Drumpf is really, really smart.  LOL.
Reagan earned $2 million for ONE speech in Japan. You call that minimal?
What is a 'regular' president? Oh – you mean white.
Are you talking about DJT?  He's not done yet.
When you spent much of your 8 years telling us that Wall St is the problem and one of the first things you do is party with billionaires and receive $400,000 for wall st speeches...well it seems a bit hypocritical. But hey, I'm a capitalist. Well done Mr. Obama, well done. Do as I say not as I do. 
Let us hope they don't change, although with that kind of money being thrown at them it's likely going to be hard to resist.
You are wrong about Obama's influence when he can still write letters to world leaders and advocate for various positions.<br/><br/>This is actually expected, otherwise he and all presidents prior would not have free US Postal mailing privileges for life.
While I disagree somewhat with some of what you've said, I have to applaud your Truman quote.<br/><br/>"You can't get rich in politics unless you're a crook. "<br/>- Harry S. Truman, 33rd President of the United States
Let me get this straight, John.<br/><br/>For eight miserable years you lot could not say often enough that Obama knows nothing of the real world.<br/><br/>Never held a real job.<br/><br/>Never ran anything.<br/><br/>"Community activist?  Pffft!"<br/><br/>Now he's gone out and free enterprised you into the ground, and he's the devil?<br/><br/>Lowest of all, with a snake oil salesman in the White House, turning an obscene profit with every carefree jaunt to Mar a Lago, every meeting scheduled into a Trump pleasure palace, you accuse Obama of a conflict of interest.<br/><br/>No wonder you chose to live in Ohio, in the bosom of your tribe.
Lyle Sparks: I would agree with you that Obama's racial breakthrough often made him an easy target for racially motivated criticism, mostly implicit by some of his white political opposition. But ask yourself this: were Obama white, removing his racially motivated criticism, what did he do to improve the lives of his Chicago neighborhood? What legacy did he leave there? Did any of his work lend itself as methodology in community organizing to a reduction in teenage gang shootings?  Say, an increase in minority police, district and federal prosecutor, judge and clerk hiring throughout the nation? No, he seemed to care less for 8 years. Not until the very end of his last four years as President did his Justice Dept. begin to address local white police abuse in minority neighborhoods largely in response to public demonstrations such as in the ones in Ferguson, MO.<br/>Congressman Keith Ellison drew much criticism recently for suggesting that Obama bears much of the blame for the election of Donald Trump. Ellison's criticism is misplaced.<br/>Obama really is to blame for seeming to fear racially motivated political criticism to a fault so that he did nothing to address the very real official racism that destroys the escape from poverty of  poor black families. And now he has the audacity to try to enrich his personal foundation and his  "My Brothers' Keeper," his failed, feckless boondoggle. 
Frugal?  Uh, no.<br/><br/>But earned?  Absolutely!<br/><br/>I didn't like him while in office (even though I am black, his policies ended up costing me more than just money), but he has more than earned the right to those big paydays!<br/><br/>I don't believe he should be held to any higher standard than any of the other presidents before him.<br/><br/>Content of character, remember?<br/><br/>I hope he gets every dollar out there, because he has certainly earned the right to do so.<br/><br/>I think the NYTimes is doing what even the Bushes - 41 or 43 - or the Clintons would never do, and that is picking on the sources of his income based on the color of his skin.
Good suggestion in principle, but you'd better demand he put the money up right there, in cash. Don't believe him if he says, "The check is in the mail"!
Agree, because by that time, there will be no US Postal Service left.
You said it all ... !!!
"Goldarnit, Mr. LaMar - you use your tounge prettier than a 20 dollar!"
Well said! Hear, hear!
You never stop with the Hillary hatred. 
Hmm just about everyone who railed against other candidates who have given speeches to wall street and other groups for pay....
She is not very likeable?
No need to wonder. Because she was female and victim of a decades long smear campaign that was adopted by her primary opponent. 
Well said!
Are you thinking the current occupant is going to solve these problems that you believe President Obama failed to?  Because I sure hope not.
Since you qualified your ranking "since Reagan" it is not possible to note that Jimmy Carter did not do this, does not do this. The crass greed of the many makes his decent humanity and humility extraordinary. Would that his behavior, in all arenas, were the ordinary and the crass money-grabbing, self-promotion and self-aggrandizement were the aberration.
I'd credit your point more if you and the Times were calling on other former presidents or influential political figures to give up the money they gained from their speeches to well-heeled organizations and businesses across the country. It's  unreasonable and disingenuous to focus on Mr. Obama alone.
"Obama left us with Trump over Clinton."<br/>nope, you left yourself with trump - apathy and stupidity and gnat-like attention spans get voters the government they deserve. The world is furious with America for this catastrophe and folks like you predictably blame Obama. That's funny.
Because you of course have no responsibility in which government comes into power?<br/><br/>Please be sure to reserve a fainting couch. I have less respect for the likes of you every time someone posts something this idiotic.
You mean the Wall Street that Trump has now formally put in charge of the country?<br/><br/>I guess Obama was a prophet.
You sold out this country for a handful of magic beans when you elected Putin's Poodle and put it in our White House.<br/><br/>Future historians will still be bemoaning your idiocy in five hundred years.
You'll recall that both times Obama ran essentially unopposed. And that McCain/Palin and Romney/Ryan were the best the GOP could do. <br/><br/>A "horror show" is what Trump gives us every day.
Oh, right. Bernie. Who was quite happy telling women &amp; brown people to get to the back of the line because once he fixed the economic problems of white men, the rest of us would sure benefit. Bernie who couldn't explain how any of his policies would be paid for and who couldn't even explain to his sychophants that they needed to REGISTER to be able to vote.<br/><br/>Tell me again how it is that Bernie lost by THREE MILLION VOTES in the primaries but still he was going to win?
Actually, the Obama brand has far more luster when he's compared with Trump, who at last count was a major-league fraud ($40 million swindled from Trump University students), a wife-beating adulterer, a deadbeat, a molester and a racist. And unlike Obama, Trump never bothered to learn anything about the presidency and its role in our government before taking the job.<br/><br/>When elected, Obama rose to the challenge of the presidency, while Trump keeps dumbing down the job until it's on the same third-grade level as the rest of Donald Trump. 
Of course a scandal-free eight years means nothing to you. Trump committed more crimes his first week in office than Obama has during his entire lifetime.
He's half Black. Now please explain what "Black" means to you, such that you can call being so is change.
Again, I must remind: "liberal" is a compliment, not an insult. English is fundamental.
That would be the same God that urged him into office, yes?<br/><br/>As you say, "Thanks, God!"
After eight years in office, you still can't spell his name correctly? Says a lot about your opinion.
Ask yourself instead how many of the Times' reporters &amp; columnists also get paid speaking fees?<br/><br/>Hey, NYT, why don't you stop accepting payment for political ads? Isn't it your duty as a member of the 4th estate to show both sides? Doesn't taking ad money from campaigns give the appearance of a conflict of interest?<br/><br/>I mean I'm sure that the fact that Trump has been advertising in your papers for years didn't lead you to go easy on him - oh, wait...
Compare Obama's policies with Trump's. Take your time, I can wait.
You're confused.  HRC was a Democrat.
Big difference between accepting money while in and/or running for office versus as a private citizen, wish one could say the same for the current occupant...
The current administration is anomaly.  Were talking about past administrations.
Thank you!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
You mean like if he was to apply for membership at a certain golf establishment? 
It's kind of you to determine what Citizen Obama may and may not choose to do.  I expect as liberals and progressives we ought to keep figuring out how much money people currently in office are getting from sources we deem inappropriate - like, oh, I don't know, Russians, say.  You are clearly not a fan of Mr. Obama or his years as President.  That speaks more about you than about him.
Yes and perhaps he should start a monastery at the top of Mt. Rushmore and swear a vow of celibacy and poverty...
How did you feel when Ronald Reagan accepted a one million dollar speaking fee from Japan? Did you criticize Reagan's "weakness, arrogance and multiple failures of judgement?" <br/><br/>The GOP's political double standard is depressing, as always.
The difference is that Barack Obama actually wrote the books published under his name. Trump hired ghostwriters, and sometimes even paid them.
Why? Is there a law against ex-presidents earning money for making speeches? Or just this particular president?
Every "crime" you mention is fictitious. Most were cooked up by the GOP. Benghazi? Have you not read a newspaper these past eight years?
Yes David I read newspapers, and based on your reply I gather you subscribe to comic books and fictional fairy tales
@David.<br/>Benghazi? Do you know why marines were changing their uniforms to civil clothes and back four times?
@kmgunder,<br/>"people of his caliber and NOTORIETY"<br/>When even his supporters say so...
Jimmy Carter gave speeches for money after his presidency.  He just had the money donated to his charities to avoid the appearance of conflicts - the same model the Clinton's used but on steroids(of course).  The big difference is Carter was getting paid about $50,000 vs $400,000 plus today.  One other thing, Carter did not have to navigate social media or the collapse of (somewhat) objective, facts driven investigative journalism that is common today.<br/><br/>Sadly, I believe Barack Obama will be the last of the post-Watergate scandal presidents.  The next crop are all going to be liberal or conservative versions of DJT.  Trump successful dodge around ethics and transparency removes the post Nixon belief that candidates should bend over backwards to prove they are not crooks or corrupt.  Unless Trump is impeached, he is now the new (low bar) for ethics in the White House.
Huh? The Times has already published many such editorials (about Trump), and will undoubtedly continue to do so. What's your problem?
Amy, between you and me, there are some people who would only be happy if they could see the Obamas back picking cotton. I'm sorry to say that, but there it is.
President George H W Bush garnered some comments for a speech shortly after he left the presidency. The criticism isn't new.
Why on Earth should Barack Obama charge a lower fee to Wall Street than anyone else they pay to speak? Are the words spoken by a Black ex-president worth less than the words spoken by a White ex-president?
Ummmm......  I think the current president has donated his annual salary back to the federal coffers.  
Can't Trump help pay for the extravagant protection given to his extended family of grifters? Of course he won't. He won't even pay his taxes.
JKR - Other than your opening sentence, in general I agree with what you wrote. However, it is not just "idolization" of Obama that troubles this reader; it is the "idolization" of too many more recent Presidents - the sanctification of Ronald Reagan by Republicans, the Cult following of the Clintons and their attached Machine, the DNC.  It is America's ever increasing bent towards celebrity and glamour over substance and accomplishment, empty rhetoric of "the feels" over substance and accomplishment, appearances and appearance over substance and accomplishment; the famous and shiny "friends" in exotic, expensive places over- and so on. It is governing like it's all "People" magazine, the Kardashianizing of a nation. Then there is Trump who acts like we are all the audience in a TV show called "Trump." All of this yields a new America: Cheapened, coarsened, vulgar, crass but shiny and fancy and pretty in nice clothes and big smiles, pointing and nodding at YOU! OMG they noticed YOU! Swoon. 
I'm glad you don't have a problem. I do. The only real function of the Democratic party these days appears to be to allow a certain segment of the people who own and operate this country to "feel good about themselves." By paying off Obama to the tune of $400,000 in this case.  The transaction can't work if the guy who takes the money isn't "idealized." <br/><br/>Wake up!
Using the word, "idolize" begs the question.  I think we admire the man for good reason.  He got his share of grief from the left for not being a savior in all things,  and immeasurable disdain from the right, so this charge of idolatry is perplexing at best.  
Who cares? He's a private citizen who can't ever run for public office again. He was the first black man in the office, and now we expect him to be the first one to turn down the money? You have got to be kidding me. I hope he makes a killing. Let the black man make as much money as he can. The next white guy can be the one who turns it down. (And in the meantime, have you seen what his successor is doing?)
The content of President Obama's speech, Bob Frankhauser, is the only thing which matters. That he gave a speech on Wall Street does NOT matter, since having investment banks hear diverse views is in the interest of everyone. That he received a $400,000 fee does NOT matter, since there is no reason for him to receive less than the going rate and no reason to think that he was compromising his previously expressed opinions about discouraging recklessness in the financial markets.
If I am not mistaken the speech is scheduled for September
Lower upper class with a $65 million book deal?????
Yes, those politicians and candidates who  give the high prices speeches will have a great advantage over the ones who don't. 
Nice guys finish last.
Of course you're right because Democrats are above criticism.
I can't tell if this is satire or not.
Obama was never one of the slammers of Wall Street. He surrounded himself with economic advisers from Wall Street. What regulation of Wall Street which resulted from their having melted down our economy was as trifling as they could get away with. Wall Street had a friend in Obama. When he addressed a group of fat cat bankers shortly after his election he told them that he was the only one standing between them and the pitchforks and torches.
Wait until he's on the campaign trail with a Bernie Sander's speech.
Unlikely. He's not as sociopathic as our present POTUS.
Our nation was founded by and fought for by liberals. And BTW, "liberal" is a compliment, not an insult.
You're right that it isn't written anywhere that he can't take Wall Street money.  It just makes him a sell out.
well that's the problem, not hard to set things up to be quite sweet after you leave "office".  
Selling out? What has he to sell besides his ideas? We have a president who is slobbering all over autocratic leaders -- actual murderers- in Turkey and the Philippines - just to protect his overblown properties in Ankara and Manila; a man who "encourages" foreign dignitaries currying favor to stay at and even invest in his real estate holdings; whose vanity and stupidity are used by nations like China to foster favor by giving economic  favors to his uninspired children. Don't you dare be disappointed" in an eminently ethical man who received 1/3 of what Trump has been paid for a speech, when you know the latter was nothing but a sales pitch and paean to his gaseous ego.
@ Craig Millett: "His weakness and the Democratic Party's refusal to embrace real change have brought us Trump."<br/><br/>This is rich (pun intended) and a stunning example of the short memory of many Americans.  President Obama endured 8 years of obstructionism, the like of which this country hasn't seen in a modern presidency.  I didn't always approve of his choices, but as an earlier poster noted, he acquitted himself well and with great dignity while in office. Thank you for your service, Mr. President.  
Debi: Why must you guys always let Obama off the hook because "it's not fair"? I thought we were getting a gutsy guy who would get in there and get something done. We all knew it wouldn't be fair and our champion let us down as did Bill Clinton before him.<br/>The Democratic Party has become effete under the leadership in place for the last 25 years. If they won't admit that and change it I'm out of here
You have to remember that both Bushes were already wealthy before assuming the presidency.  Neither the Clintons or Obama's were.  And why, with the current president we have now who entertains corrupt dictators, would Obama not be able to take the vacation of his choice?  Must he don the robes of an ascetic and eschew anything but the thinnest gruel for meals? Will he have nothing worthwhile to offer in regards to his experience and views because he has now been somehow "tainted" -- while the current individual occupying the White House has behavior that is beneath contempt WHILE IN OFFICE?
The Bush family was already wealthy.  If it weren't, W would have been working at a carwash instead of at the presidency.  Daddy and his wealthy friends bailed W out of every business failure he perpetrated.  Unfortunately, his failure as president resulted in approximately 500,000 people dead and millions displaced, not to mention the creation of ISIS and the unsettling of the Middle East for generations.  So your inclination to forgive W all this because he, a poor speaker, stays home and paints, is obscene.
Obama gave the Democratic party "hope and inspiration" for eight years.  How much longer must he?  (And, by the way, he still gives me hope and inspiration.)  No, what the Democratic party needs is some guts (I didn't use another word that would have, perhaps, been censored) to fight like the Republicans fight (albeit legally).  Elizabeth Warren can't do it all alone.  The party has become the party of wimps, that is the problem.
The idea that Trump earned all his money is a fantasy. Daddy started him off with millions, and Trump's "fortune" can only be estimated until Trump fulfills his obligation to the American people and puts his tax returns on the table the same way HRC did: ten years' worth of complete returns, personal and foundation. Trump should also add all his business returns, just as a gesture of goodwill.<br/><br/>Of course Trump won't ever turn over his tax returns. There must be at least one patriot left at the IRS...
Did Ronald Reagan compromise himself by taking one million dollars for a speech in Japan?
Reagan was similarly criticized in the press for accepting such a large honorarium at a time when the Japanese government was struggling with corruption charges, so yes, he did compromise himself.  For me Obama's action is more disappointing, however, as Reagan lacked a similar moral stature--our expectations were much lower for the architect of Iran-Contra.
jrj90620<br/><br/>The problem here is your ill-informed and circumspect idea of what socialism is, not your contention that rich people are incapable of caring for every member of their society, so Obama is a liar.<br/><br/>That's an outgrowth of your fear of the American people who are not you, your steady diet of Right Wing Pap (best with Let Them Eat cake), and your inability to process two thoughts at once.<br/><br/>Socialism is a conviction that society matters.  That everyone is better when society is better.<br/><br/>It is not about government "taking over" everything, like they do when they force women to go without birth control or deny them abortions, or deny cities and towns the right to be free of BIG Federal Government on issues like gun registration.<br/><br/>Socialism, at base, says "Everyone deserves to be treated they way you, jrj90620, believe you should be treated".<br/><br/>Not that everybody should have as much stuff as everybody else.<br/><br/>Not that every person is a smart as every other person.<br/><br/>Not that the Rich, or America, or even Republicans are evil incarnate.<br/><br/>But ALSO not that corporations, or business people, or religious folks deserve some super special respect.  <br/><br/>Not, either, that rich guys deserve to pay less taxes because they are super special people and the only people who know how to work, work, work, and because they're rich we know they're super special good so they will take all this money we're giving them and make excellent jobs for the lazy no-talent loser/takers.
Trump is the very definition of grace and dignity!
I hope you learn someday that "liberal" is not an insult, it's a compliment.
Were you in favor of Ronald Reagan earning one million dollars for a speech in Japan shortly after Reagan left office?
I was also against President Reagan's taking the money for his speeches in Japan when he left office.  The US had been in heated trade competition with Japan while he was president, that Japan seemed to be winning at the time.  The high payment for the speeches gave the appearance of a possible conflict of interest.  I'm not saying that there was an actual conflict, because like Obama, Reagan was a very interesting speaker and people could have just wanted to hear him.  That said,  I think ex-presidents receive enough (well deserved) legal life-time perks from their times in office that they should not accept controversial huge paydays when they leave.  (Please forgive me if I seem self righteous). 
True believer alert!  I'm sure former President Obama appreciates your expectation that he and his wife will spend all of their millions and millions and millions of dollars on the peasantry.  Next time they hang out for ten days with Richard Branson on one of his private islands, or on David Geffen's yacht, maybe someone can point out some poor people to help.
Does hypocrisy not play a role?
You're talking about the Republicans, aren't you? They're owned lock, stock and barrel by the forces of Organized Money.
Obama had a scandal-free eight years in office. Trump began looting our government from Day 1. And which one is still hiding his tax returns...and why?
As opposed to the wholesale taxpayer looting that Trump has engaged in since Inauguration Day?
I have some suggestions for how you should spend YOUR money. That's fair, isn't it?
Yes, treabeton, a donation of the fee would be good politically, but it is not necessary for ethical reasons. Republicans -- and this editorial -- apply a false equivalence of President Obama's conduct with President Trump's pocket-stuffing misuse of his office. The same thing happened with Hillary Clinton's speaking fees.
He's no longer on any road, high or low. He's in the pay dirt.
Hard dues?? Are you kidding?
Right on!
Please!  What does the topic matter and what does the audience matter?  Unless he's dropping gold bars in audience members' laps, his speech is not objectively worth $400,000.  No one's speech is.  The only thing that makes corporations, universities, and groups willing to pay such fees is the prospect of influence over the speech giver.
It's on healthcare and it's to a conference organized by Cantor Fitzgerald - one of the companies worst hit by 9/11 (I believe they lost 2/3 of their employees) and a company which has done a lot of philanthopic work since 9/11.
BSM, Obama has not "earned" this money any more than a winning lottery ticket winner earned the jackpot.  He is leveraging the prestige of his former office and access to the political establishment, for cashola. And regarding his "fame" or infamy if you like, we the people gave it to him by way of electing him to serve us.  He is not famous like the Hollywood stars you mention, who achieved notoriety from their acting talents. Obama's fame was acquired on our backs.
So I bet you're just livid that Trump charges 1.5 MILLION per speech and has more of the 1% in his cabinet than either Obama or Bush?
It's really amazing to witness zombie-like partisanship, isn't it? Both the Rs and Ds do it.<br/><br/>The non-partisans see these $400,000 speeches for what they are – payback for not prosecuting a single person for the fraud during the mortgage crisis. Obama prosecuted ZERO.
I agree with your comments wholeheartedly and which reflect the very definition of "corporatists".  And that is today's Democratic Party....the party of Goldman Sachs with a rainbow flag.  It doesn't ally with the people when push comes to shove.  What happened to the public option in the ACA?
The times have changed, obviously, since Reagan left office. 
If he talks the talk then he better walk the walk.  President Obama spent a lot of time speaking negatively about the top 1% and the inequities produced by an increasingly unequal distribution of wealth in this country.  Yet, post-Presidency, he has literally spent most of his time vacationing with billionaires.  Then, when he declares he's back to work the "work" is multiple speeches for ridiculous amounts of money.<br/>That right there is pure limousine liberalism and we all have the right to label it as such.  The book deals alone would keep the family in the top 1% for life.
I agree.<br/><a href="http://publicspeaking.co.ke/post/10-highest-paid-public-speakers-in-the-world" title="http://publicspeaking.co.ke/post/10-highest-paid-public-speakers-in-the-world" target="_blank">http://publicspeaking.co.ke/post/10-highest-paid-public-speakers-in-the-...</a>
"... no one is really saying Obama did anything legally wrong or even accusing him of lobbying or doing favors for Wall Street."<br/><br/>Actually Eric, I am saying that, and so are many other commenters. We are saying that the $400K looks a lot like a deferred bribe in exchange for the Obama Administration not prosecuting ANYONE for the financial crisis and also for watering down Dodd-Frank.
Can you spell hypocrite?
Why doesn't Jimmy Carter count? He was the best of the lot.
Why doesn't President Carter count, because other than Truman he was our only bona fide moral leader to occupy the White House in about a century. ROFL.
But it was not fine when Clinton did it. Clinton was heavily criticized, and it shaped the way his legacy is viewed - it's one of many reasons he's not viewed as positively now as he was when he was president. And it just doesn't make sense to compare to Republicans, who don't see anything wrong with cashing out and catering to the 1% to begin with.
He still take home a nice pension for life, benefits and ample perks for his family. 
......not to mention that "Their self-righteousness and their desire for perfection....." helped Clinton lose the election......
Beautifully written.
GWB didn't need lectures
"...but I'm distressed that he accepted this speaking fee because it plays to every misconception many Trump voters have about who the Clinton wing of the Democratic Party is beholden to. It's not true, but the perception is there...."<br/><br/>It's not true?  Two-thirds of former President Obama's campaign support came from Wall Street. 
They are not tone deaf! This is how the Democratic party now works. This is not an anomaly, it's not a gaffe, it's business as usual for these guys. Wake up!
Oh I think they saw it coming but thought it wouldn't change the outcome.  But she was hit by the 3 'coms':  Comey, Commies and Complacency on the part of those Clinton voters who, believing the polls, had something better to do on election day.
Barack Obama is no longer in office.
"Contrast Obama's honorable behavior with the looter Trump"? The comparison is obscene; it shouldn't even be considered possible. That's the problem. This is tainted money. 
You might take a look at Obama's giving Wall Street crooks a pass after the 2008 Crash.  Nobody went to jail!  Compare this to the Savings &amp; Loan prosecutions in the 1980's.  He did not "ignore" this opportunity to service Wall Street and ignore what is just and right.
How can you be so sure Obama did NOT cash in while in office? He saw how the Clintons cashed in. Do you think he MIGHT have made sure that Hillary wasn't indicted so he was able to benefit as well from the millions that Hillary and Bill were hauling in? WHILE he was president and Hillary was working for HIM? One thing about liberal politicians - they are HYPOCRITES and will money-grub as quickly as the next corrupt politician. The Obamas and the Clintons abused the huge tax-payer 'expense accounts' granted to the White House like no other presidents ever!
deflection....pathetic
Amen and you hit the nail on the head for why an outsider with wealth (Trump) was voted in.  If he doesn't need the wealth and acclaim, maybe he won't slobber over anti-American interests and special interests and party coffers.
He arrived in DC the owner of a $million Chicago mansion. 
HARHARHARHAR.  Scandal free!  Rich.  Praise Obama for what he did accomplish -the decimation of  the Democrat party!!
Trump doesn't need the money. He should stop making money as President and set up a charity. Period.
@AK,<br/>Or at least every second one at half a price.
@ Gordon Herndon,<br/>"These are just the beginning days of President Obama and First Lady Michelle finding their way in their new ex-presidential world."<br/>Yes, that's exactly the truth.
Keep moving those goalposts, boys of the Democrat 'hood.
I hope you show the same benevolence of spirit for President Trump and his family.  In their first 100 days (and before he even took Office) the media bashed him more than the 8 years of Obamaism combined!!!
Harharhar - thanks for the comic relief!!
The private sexual behavior of others, even the powerful or famous, is of no interest to me. The public governing behavior of elected officials is of great importance to me.
Let's not forget this: "Biden says Obama offered financial help amid son's illness."(CNN, 1/12/16)<br/>The current POTUS can't even spell charitable.
THANK YOU!  THANK YOU!  THANK YOU!  I agree with every syllable!  
Thank you for your comments, let alone the link to "Forbes". I think the "New York Times", let alone Senator Elizabeth Warren spoke too soon and with too much certainty.
Squalor? You do realize he signed a $65 million book deal, gets a pension of $200K plus per year and free healthcare for life, right? 
Why shouldn't Democrats be like Republicans? That is what they have become and that is what gave us Trump. Unfortunately people naively believed a con man who said he wasn't beholden to Wall Street, but the spectacle of Dems giving six-figure speeches to the very people they are supposedly protecting us from played right into his hands. The fact that Obama is no longer in office is irrelevant. The message is still you be nice to the rich and they'll take care of you when you leave office. The Democratic party is doomed unless it truly represents the progressive needs of the 99%.
"....8 scandal-free years?"  You're kidding, right?<br/><br/>Fast &amp; Furious Gun-walking Scandal being the cause of many deaths of Mexican citizens AND federal agent Brian Terry is a scamdal, no matter how you look at it.<br/><br/>But for all they know he might be planning to bank that for a favored candidate's presidential campaign!<br/><br/>Good to see he's earning more than Benjamin Bernanke, though!
And for all they know, he might be creating a political war chest like the Clintons did...for Michelle's presidential campaign....
They wouldn't ask Sanders to speak.
You throw words like "nepotism" around like a President naming his own brother US Attorney General is no big deal....<br/><br/>The truth is, it's been happening since before the 1929 Depression.
Then why does he need to be paid to say it? 
No matter what, if he did the work he should get all the money he's entitled to get.<br/><br/>And believe me, he did the work!
Why wouldn't he just say this then?
No, the reason Obama is coming under such scrutiny is that he clearly came from humble economic origins, and as the editorial makes clear from quoting his autobiography, he was very aware of how his own interests and views came to be influenced by being surrounded by the 1% in this country.  This gave the public hope that he would not behave like the rest of them.  And your assertion that no one cares about what Trump is doing has no basis in fact, as the pages of the NYT can tell you every day.  Invoking Trump just shows how long the bar has been set.
This is not about race. It is about the hope that Obama can buck the trend of former presidents of recent times where only Jimmy Carter has been the exception. It is about hoping that Obama will not lose touch with his moral touchstones. It is about the consequences of a world where only money counts for anything. That is the only sub-text I read.
That is absurd. Clinton was criticized for this exact same behavior. Carter and Truman both rejected corporate funding like this. To pit race and "getting money out of politics" as rival goals is such a devastating disservice to both causes.
Bravo! Well said!
Thank you, my thoughts as well. This criticizing Obama is getting old. 
Spike Lee was not a retired elected official.  There is a difference.
He is no longer a politician, and one speech is not a feast at a trough.  It's easy to decide what his actions should be if they are not yours.
He's retired from politics, not dead. He is a young man in his fifties, and had a family, and a life that needs to be financed by income for maybe up to another half a century.<br/><br/>He has to earn money in whatever legal and ethical means are open to the now famous man, a household name, who held the most powerful public office in the world for eight years, and must now in all probability become an employee answering to someone without a fraction of his experience in management. Making speeches for good money seems a very good compromise while adjusting his expectations and his mindset to face the rest of his life as not the president. <br/><br/>This is a flesh and blood man with a flesh and blood family, who in the most powerful office in the US and therefore the most powerful man in the world did not earn a huge salary that he could live off for the remainder of his days, even with a government pension, and to preserve his 'legacy' has to be very careful about which firms would he could work for without besmirching his own reputation.<br/><br/>That usually means high finance or oil as the only people who can afford to hire ex presidents and usually as workless directors because who needs an alpha male with opinions sticking their nose into normal operations and expressing themselves freely, but at least he hasn't done what our particular ethics free rogues within our Conservative ranks in the UK do, and not just lobby but have permanent paid positions and work for them while still in office.
Well, the Republican voters who believed the nonsense that Obama was a flaming leftist Kenyan born anti colonial radical might also have been fooled. Obviously their leaders knew Obama was an Eisenhower Republican at heart but that wouldn't win raw power so a Marxist bogeyman had to be made out of this overly meek man.
Given that his properties are all operating businesses, wouldn't they be generating the same sorts of money even if Trump hadn't been President?
"Let's win by all means possible, and then get about correcting the ills of our democratic system."<br/><br/>Michael, here's the problem. In 2006 and 2008, the Democrats won their most decisive victories in more than 40 years. They then went about not correcting ANY of the ills of the system. The issue is not willingness to win; the issue is willingness to make necessary and meaningful changes when you do win. The Democratc were lacking in that sense last time, and it wound up leading to loss (2010) after loss (2014) after loss (2016).
Chump change?  Do you know how much that money could mean if it were divided and given to 8 or 10 poor families?  And PS, Obama is a one-percenter now. 
True, Josie J., no one else is deprived of the $400K paid to Obama...<br/><br/>Except for those whose money the Wall Street investment firms made in order to pass it on to Barack,<br/><br/>It's just another form of wealth transfer, this time with only one family being the beneficiary.
Uncooperative? Cooperating with one's own hanging is not a prerequisite for valor. If you are a Clinton Democrat, thanks  for us bringing   President Trump.  Until the establishment Democrats own their gift of the presidency to Trump it won't be the Sander's people who are hurtling our nation towards right wing authoritarianism
Republicans like to say if a Progressive does not wear a hair shirt and take a vow of poverty they are hypocrites. Now it is impossible to accuse a Republican of hypocrisy because it is one of their highest values. Witness their support of gays staying in the closet. Accusing a Republican of hypocrisy is like accusing a Progressive of tolerance. So yes, Democrats are held to a higher standard.
As I recall, there were as many voices against politicians cashing-in in such obscene fashion each and every time it came to light.<br/><br/>Obama is not being held to a different standard.  He is just as despicable as the Clintons and others have been,
How true.  Obama won office with the votes of both white and black voters.  He had much if not most of America cheering him, believing in him.  He squandered that support because he didn't want to rock the boat and jeopardize his re-election.  And he began his descent even before he took his oath of office, by his appointments of Geithner and Summers.  And then almost immediately he extended the Bush tax cuts for the wealthy.  Let's not forget how quickly he did an about-face on universal single-payer health insurance, something he supported as a candidate until that put him at risk.   We might not have been so disappointed if Obama hadn't held himself out as such an idealistic advocate.  His rhetoric was soaring.  His performance, his actual ideals and moral courage, not so much. 
I would reject your contention that Obama was even a mediocre leader of this country.<br/><br/>Look at the world today and ask if we are living in safer times as a result of his tenure.  Look at our nation and ask if were are less divided then when he took office.  Look at our economy and ask if the is a real recovery in progress.  Look at your grocery store bill and ask if there has really been no significant inflation over the past eight years?  Look at the breakdown, Democrat v Republican, of control of state legislatures, governorships, the House and the Senate as a function of Obama's leadership.<br/><br/>By every measure, Obama will be found lacking by the objective reviewer.<br/><br/>And, having been found lacking, how can Obama even be considered to be average unless you are willing to believe that the leadership of our Executive Branch and rarely rise above unacceptable?
The whole Clinton modus operandi of moving to the center, allying with corporate donors, teaming up with a republican congress to pass legislation, calling things like universal healthcare impossible, etc, is the opposite of the good fight.<br/>They sold your out decades ago, but you pray to them like gods.<br/>Haiti was their pet project, where they honeymooned. They sent the military there in the nineties. Later they went to do earthquake relief and got nothing done, but cut deals for friends. The poll they commissioned puts their highest popularity in Haiti at 41%!<br/>Bill Clinton helped Milton Friedman's Chicago School of Economics give away the entire Soviet economy to the Russian oligarchy, raising poverty above 50%, and slashing life expectancy by ten years.<br/>They party with the Trumps.<br/>That is why bankers party then millions. Now bankers, who Obama protected pay him millions too. With friends like Democrats, who needs Trump?
The Clinton Foundation has saved lives; it has delivered clean water wells to numerous countries in West Africa.  It has funded schools and education in third world countries.  What has the Trump Foundation done?  It has spent money to pay for a 6' tall portrait of the current President when he wasn't old and fat.  It has paid Trump's legal fees incurred by planting a flag pole in a place not zoned for it.  It is now under investigation in NYC by the Atty. General.  
No hour speech is worth $400,000. There has to be something wise they got for that money.<br/>Bankers do their accountingin fractions of a penny. They don't just pay some liberal $400,000 to come "speak truth to their power." They are way too cheap. They make investments and expect big returns. That is what they do. And Geico saves you hundreds.<br/>All of you loyal Democrats need to stop compromising all principle for your rockstar politicians. No matter how low. you go, republicans will never vote for you. You need the left base and the left base demands honesty and transparency.<br/>If Clinton had followed her campaign slogan and went high, she may have won. But she promised nothing to the middle class, and just ran ads telling us how bad trump was, like he wasn't bragging about it already.
No the Republicans that you complain about every day laud Trump. The left hates Trump.<br/>Why do Democrats always want to be like republicans? How is trump the bar you set for yourselves?
Yes.You are who you eat.
Why don't you ask the President for a transcript of his speech?  Otherwise, accept that this man has a right to build financial security for his wife, his daughters, and all future family members.
I agree with you, but in all of the comments here that I have been reading I have seen no mention of the Clintons' having amassed riches for - what exactly? They have been on public payrolls all of their adult lives and they are mega-millionaires. America likes to pay its celebrities big money - see professional sports, actors, rock and roll performers - and less often pays the legitimate workers, genuine talent, actual "public servants" well at all. Bright, shiny, glitzy, showy, glib, slick, make-ya-feel-good types - happy to pocket your dollars while saying whatever you want them to say, whatever sells. As one who worked for and voted for Obama and actually did have HOPE for CHANGE, it fairly broke my (political) heart to see a Republican emerge from the Democratic/Progressive campaign persona so quickly.  He was always a good friend to Wall Street, Banks, and Big Corporations so now they pay him and the Clintons and all the oligarchs. Still hoping for change. Emily Dickinson wrote, "Hope is the thing with feathers That perches in the soul, And sings the tune without the words, And never stops at all, And sweetest in the gale is heard; And sore must be the storm That could abash the little bird That kept so many warm."
Oh please.  For 8 years people like you held President Obama to a different standard than any other president.  Now, you want to complain because he is making money after his term is up.  How much do YOU think President is worth?  I bet dollars to donuts you don't have any problem with Drumpf using the office to enrich him, his children and cronies.  You people are disgusting with your privilege.  How is President Obama responsible for every one else's principles and values.  Get real!
"Bill Cullen"? As in, "The Price Is Right"? LOL!!!!
You're not only tone deaf but off-kilter. Where's the outrage at someone profiting from the Presidency while residing in the WH??
"He who pays the piper calls the tune."  Could it be that Obama is pLaying the Wall Street tune callers?   
You do realize he is not you, don't you?
Yes, those evil book publishers! They must be up to something! (Note my sarcasm)<br/><br/>When publishers acquire rights to a highly anticipated book there's typically a bidding war. This led to the $65 million up front.<br/><br/>Will Penguin Random House make money? Maybe not immediately, but perhaps over 5-10 years and they're probably looking at bigger picture. Having this title under their imprint will allow them to pick many other authors who may have gone to other publishers.<br/><br/>When PRH paid millions for Bush's Decision Points people similarly thought they were crazy. Turned out to be a huge windfall for them in the long run.<br/><br/>Publishers can make good money on their "backlist", books that were published long ago. Gotta look at the long view some times, especially with books!
They have a lifetime income. It's called a presidential pension and it's over 200k a year, 
But we don't forbid them from making money on their own. That would merit a much better pension.
I would agree, except that our current president has lowered the bar for the integrity of such foundations. However I do agree in general simply because Mr Obama has already shown by his actions that he is a man of integrity.
Obama never aspired to the job of the Presidency, but rather to the office!
So you're just fine with someone who rails against income inequality getting $400,000 from Wall Street so long as you agree with the speech?  That's basically saying you're just fine with someone being completely hypocritical, so long as you agree with them.  You being a hypocrite too doesn't negate someone elses
The president cannot and does not put people in jail! it's simply not the way our system works. Fortunately or unfortunately, we live in a land with weakened laws to go after players like the Wallstreet bankers responsible for the 2008 economic collapse.<br/>Let's all face it. Obama did the best he could given the circumstances. what should really anger all of us is the current administration's efforts to undo the modest financial reforms keeping Wallstreet in check. 
Except he did get a multi-million dollar golden parachute -- in the form of a book deal worth $65 million. He wouldn't have gotten that but for the office. 
 Anne Coulter is on the speaker circuit, for god's sake. 
You don't consider this a betrayal?  Or you've just gotten used to it?  
Regan's speaking tour of Japan was for $2M.<br/><br/>And, when he and Nancy returned, Nancy bailed on a San Fernando Valley drug-treatment project…
Bill and Melinda Gates are trying to privatize education for private profit. Don't trust billionaires. They are not on your side. And don't trust people the billionaires pay millions to. They are not on your side either.
Oh and the worst of all, George Soros.
It's not what he does with the money, it's what he does for it. 
How quickly we forget what an upstanding man Obama is.
The TARP legislation had the US Taxpayer buy freshly printed paper securities that were "TOXIC" and/or "WITHOUT EQUITY" and/or created out of thin air by our US Wall Street financial geniuses in order to save the US economy!<br/><br/>President Bush signed the TARP legislation into law October 3, 2008.<br/><br/>Some of the TARP funds were handed out to the Wall Street financial geniuses by President Bush, but President Obama handed out the majority of the TARP money to the various Wall Street Wizards.<br/><br/>President Obama should not have passed out those TARP funds<br/><br/>How much of those TARP funds ended up in President Obama's Billion Dollar re-election campaign fund?
Foundation proceeds were not so charitable with the Clinton's and there will be increased scrutiny of individuals using these structures in the future
Something in return? How about a chance to rub elbows? See the audience applaud? Receive "points" for the "get" from the boss? It doesn't always have to be nefarious. <br/><br/>Oracle paid Condi Rice to speak at an event I was at. Also recently Tom Brokaw. Very cool. It was pretty interesting to hear them speak, live and in person. <br/><br/>I think that many who get up in arms over such speeches were never part of the audience for such speeches. 
Thank you for your clear assessment. Don't we all want these people of influence to be influenced by President Obama?
I would draw the line for someone in s job that has influence over public policy, and that does include former editors of the NY Times. There are way too many people who are supposed to be on the side of truth and the people getting paid way too much money by the super rich, at the same time the super rich are using their money to write legislation designed to take or money and put it in their pockets.<br/>At a time in history when a Princeton study can show that well over 90 % of policy is designed to benefit the 1%, while the rest of us have specialty 0% influence, smoke is fire. And corn parties are responsible for this corruption. <br/><br/>Corporations are Not People. Money is Not Speech.<br/><br/>And taking large amounts of money from people that profit from government policy is not ok.<br/>Fire all of the Democrats and all of the Republicans.
Yes, off you want the people to trust you, you have to hold yourselves to a higher standard than the party of super rich thieves.<br/>The Clinton policy of "If you can't beat them, join them," is costing the Democrats 2/3 of all elections.<br/>We already have a Global Oligarchy Party. Republican lite is redundant and bound to lose.
He wouldn't be the first.  Let him go build houses for the poor with Jimmy Carter. Why do Democrats keep calling the Republicans the "Greater Evil," then in the next breath say we need to be more like them?
Maybe just not handicap ourselves needlessly, rather than framing this as "we need to be more like them?"
Actually, no. If we wanted him in the White House, Hillary would be in the White House.<br/>Reading this and pretty much all the other posts here just proves that despite the election, liberals are still out of touch with what America wants.
TOO COZY WITH WALL STREET? Yes, I'm shouting. Take a look at Trump's government, for crying out loud. Obama was not a hypocrite about the way he staffed his government. Trump excoriated Wall Street before he chose all his Goldman-Sachs guys.
Actually, the democrats didn't suffer a humiliating defeat--remember?
Obama himself is all the red meat the opposition has ever needed.  Urging Obama to walking around. on his tipsy toes so as to not stir Republicans is a waste of time.  Change should come in the form of Democrats not caring about what Republicans think. Trump voters couldn't care less about you 
The government spent just as much money to protect the Obamas on the insanely expensive vacations they took, too. Or did you not notice?
Correct me if I'm wrong but I believe the criticism here is coming from the NY Times who has had plenty to say about Mr. Trump's cabinet picks, as well as everything else about him, and none of it has been complimentary.
SO   rue<br/>Obama is no longer the standard bearer for his party. The D emocrats have enough problems without him courting the super rich
So, Obama is patiently greedy? Walked to the trough instead of running.
Scandal free? Are you kidding me? This is why Trump won. Liberals live in a land of unicorns. Just to name a few:<br/>1. IRS Targeting Scandal<br/>2. VA Waiting List and Deaths Scandal<br/>3. GSA Spending Spree<br/>4. Benghazi<br/>5. Clinton Email Scandal<br/>6. Fast and Furious Scandal<br/>7. Solyndra et al Scandal<br/>8. Countless DOJ scandals<br/>9. NSA conducting mass surveillance without warrants<br/>10. Iran hostage ransom lies<br/>11. BP oil mismanagement<br/>12. EPA poisoning Colorado river<br/>13. Secret Service scandal<br/>That's just off he top of my head. If we don't re-renter reality the Great Orange One is guaranteed to win in 2020.
Scandal free? What, are you trying out to be a Times reporter or did you just forget his secretary of state conspired to prevent her communications from being disclosed to the public as the law requires, or that his attorney general sold automatic weapons to gang members and then lost track of them (resulting in at least one death) or that his IRS commissioner targeted groups due to their political beliefs and then lied, repeatedly, about it? <br/><br/>I'm no fan of the current president but don't follow the Times' lead and ignore facts that are inconvenient to your argument. It discredits everything else you say. 
Show me a major leaguer who makes $400K for a thirty minute appearance. LOL
For entertaining people and protecting the "uncertainty" of the game. Try doing what they do before belittling them.
For doing something 99.99% of people cannot do. Hitting a baseball is so hard, if you manage to do it 3 out of 10 times during your career, you get in the hall of fame.
IN the first few weeks of the first Obama administration, I was horrified by the number of bankers brought in to solve The Great Recession. I suppose we will never really know if they could have done much good given GOP pledges of resistance at every turn. One can only imagine the pace of recovery had their been GOP participation in the solution. But, hey! The GOP devotion to supply-side, trickle-down economic policies created every recession since the 1970s. <br/><br/>So give the former president and Michelle a chance to show how they will use their sudden new wealth for the sake of compassion and empathy, like Jimmy Carter. You are too quick to judge. Be a patient. There is no room for instant gratification. Let their philanthropic hearts take it from here. After all, you have to make a lot of money to give away a lot of money for great causes. 
I'm not too quick to judge anything. I gave Obama 8 years and he was a disappointment, particularly after his first term. He is continuing to be disappointing. There is nothing new here -  he is a neoliberal and if the D party is to survive it has to pick a side: the people or the banks. They can't continue to have it both ways. 
Not only that, Trump has advisors who are employed by Goldman-Sachs, the very firm he excoriated HRC for collecting a speaking fee from.
It's what Obama does with the money that is the point. He kept it whereas he could have donated it. This editorial is about putting your money where your ideals are or were!
OBAMA is ignoring the criticism. Put a $figure on time wasted by obstructionism of his agenda and this 400K seem s like peanuts.
Be patient. The funding of non-profit programs can take a lot of money. I have worked in the non-profit world of environmental science education and I can tell you, it takes a lot of money from many sources to succeed in the mission. Wait this out. You will see that the Obamas will take in bags of money to fund empathy and compassion and science. <br/><br/>Have patience. Jimmy Carter took a while to get some traction for his projects. The Obamas will not let us down. Let them bring in the money. They will spend and donate wisely. 
We have no way of knowing what he plans to do with money he has not yet earned.
Liberals don't say that everyone should have the same income. What we want is for everyone to have a fair shot at making a productive life and that society as a whole should assure that everyone has the basics (decent housing, education, clean environment, healthcare) and an opportunity to earn a living wage in a safe environment.
"The issue I have is, Democrats and especially Obama, espouse that everyone should have equal income, that no one should have more than anyone else".<br/> This is simply not true. Right-wing talk shows claim this so many of its listeners believe it, but it is not true. Democrats do care about equal opportunity and about a truly adequate safety-net, a reasonable floor. Democrats (and, it used to be, some Republicans too) believe that certain benefits of society should go to everyone in it. We actually believe that there is a responsibility that we have for one another's well-being that is properly addressed through government not just through individual charity.
Democrats do not believe everyone should have equal income; they believe that everyone should have an income that allows them the ability to live decently and provide for their family's needs without sacrifice.  I am not sure how you came to this conclusion, but it is an erroneous one.
Yes, the Democrats HAVE demonized wealth. They praise socialism but just like all socialist leaders throughout history, the practice of socialism only applies to the masses. The elite in a socialist state always reap the rewards of capitalism. 
He and his wife have a combined 65 million dollar book deal...you're acting as if the Obamas are middle class...Not to mention that the threshold for being in the top 1% is around 465K for the current year. Even with only the presidential salary, the Obamas are in the top 2% of earners in the US. 
Bravo, Mary! I, too, believe the Obamas will use their new-found fortunes to fund a wide range of non-profit entities. Having worked for years in the non-profit arena (environmental education), I know it takes a lot of money to do what we do. It takes an enormous effort to FIND that money to fund the cause.<br/><br/>The Obamas will either start new non-profits or provide funding for others. 
On 60 MINUTES last night some state governor's bribery conviction was overturned by the US Supreme Court. <br/><br/>This sends the message that bribery of government officials is OK.
And let's not forget Billy Tauzin, the congressman from Louisiana who killed the bill providing drug discounts to seniors on Medicare. Immediately after that coup, in 2005, he left the House to become the CEO of PhRMA, a.k.a Big Pharma. He did their bidding and left in the cover of darkness. <br/><br/>The revolving door relationship between corporate America and government "service" is disgraceful. Today, Mr. Trump has installed the enemies of the very regulators we need to keep the air and water clean, to police energy extractors, and to promote public education. Instead, the revolving door has allowed a group of parasites to destroy our country. 
athens area,<br/><br/>From the part of PA that voted overwhelmingly for McCain and Romney, who are certainly paragons of "being in touch with the Common Man", right?<br/><br/>Interesting. What could have been the motivation, I wonder?
Sorry, I can't accept that it's okay for us to be ruled by an overclass as long as that overclass is ethnically diverse or has women among its representatives.
MAL,<br/><br/>Well, you must be very happy now-- the Common Man is in charge.<br/><br/>Or is he?
Because it's the right thing to do? Because when they go low we go high? Because, in the first place, using Trump as a moral or ethical standard is ludicrous? 
You're entitled to your opinion; he's diminished in my view, however. 
I wouldn't hold my breath....
... never run for office again ...  ?<br/><br/>After his presidency, John Quincy Adams ran for and was elected to the House of Representatives where he served for 17 years.
Joel,<br/><br/>You have got to be kidding.<br/>Obama job as President was one of the most difficult in the world ?<br/><br/>I guess you never picked cotton, worked in a slaughter house, worked<br/>as a farmer, stood on your feet all day at an Assembly line, was a Bus Driver<br/>in a dangerous part of town, were a policeman, teacher or a soldier<br/>sent off to war.<br/><br/>Give me the White House to live in Free, a finely cooked meal everyday,<br/>and Limousine and Helicopter and Air Force One rides anywhere at anytime -<br/>any day of the week, month or years...<br/><br/>Where is the money for the soldiers broken in battle, for teachers who try<br/>to teach in the worse schools, for those who never made much money in life<br/>doing our most dangerous and difficult jobs ?
The fact that he let Wall Street off so easy during his administration amounts to a "deferred quid pro quo".
Mother Teresa would take the money.
He IS a celebrity. That's his peer group. :)
Trevor Noah said it best when he said that the "black guy" should not be the first to turn down the money.  He says let some white dude lead that charge.  I have to agree.  The Obamas collectively put up with more mistreatment, disrespect and abuse than any Americans in modern times.  Let them now get compensated.
Amen to everything you said, Louie B!!
As long as he stays a private citizen, I fully agree.  The moment he starts making political speeches or attending DNC leadership conferences, I have an issue.
I agree.  This article and many comments sound just a bit too purist, which is a big problem with Democrats today (and I am a Democrat).  I am really tired of people on both sides of the aisle being purist.  I don't like corruption either but this isn't corruption!  It is possible to be rich and still understand and do good for the common people.  Warren Buffett and Bill Gates are two examples of that.  It is also possible to have compromise but that seems to be a value of the past.
I am shocked by the apologists, he just signed a $65M book deal. How much money do you need.  This is a bribe, pure and simple.  
And Wall Street will deduct the 400K on their taxes so it will not cost them that much
He just made $63 million in a book deal. Suggesting that he's not wealthy and really needs this $400,000 is laughable. Also, we can't criticize Republicans who take cushy lobbying jobs and whatnot as a reward after they leave office if our party leaders do the same thing and we make excuses.
mancuroc, The fact that he is black has nothing to do with the suggestion that Obama demonstrate his solidarity with the 99% by refusing the post presidential Kardashiization of presidents. The article pointed out that Jimmy Carter avoided doing this, and I feel that Carter's effectiveness as a moral beacon is partly due to his aversion to becoming one of the 1%. You do remember that Hillary Clinton played both sides, donating much to her foundation, but becoming well known for both the excessive reimbursement and content of her speeches to the Wall street crowd. I remain a strong Hillary supporter, but I dont want her to ever run again, given how effectively that was used against her. I do feel sad that Obama, a really inspiring president with a model family, is ignoring the impact this type of activity will have on his legacy. Jim DeMint, Newt Gingrich, Vladimir Putin; not a great group to emulate.
Steve Bolger,<br/>By that logic why does any capitalist need to go on making money after they have enough to live on for the rest of their lives?<br/>Mr Obama is only being paid this money to make the system of paying bribes in this way seem legitimate. 
At some point the accumulation of wealth becomes the power to bluff and bully. A plutocracy is a land of private patronage.<br/><br/>When one believes one has enough money to last the rest of one's lifs, why abase oneself for more?
Bernie is a narcissistic fool led down the primrose path by false flattery, false flag volunteers, and false-front money.<br/><br/>To me, it was Obama 2008 Redux.
US voters have recently elected the very best “Established Mainstream Republican” and “Established Mainstream Democratic” congressmen, congresswomen, senators, governors, presidents and other government positions that money from that the various” Foundation” donors, the elite “DONOR CLASS” campaign contributors, and the PAC (foreign and domestic) campaign contributors can buy.<br/><br/>Our elected and appointed officials do, however, offer to SELL THEIR VOTES for tax loopholes, bankruptcy laws, offshore tax havens, Free Trade Agreements, MFN trade statuses, PNTR trade statuses, Alaskan drilling permits, no-bid PAY TO PLAY government contracts funded from the public treasuries such as the CGI Federal no-bid contract; Solyndra type government loan guarantees; MILITARY SECRET weapon system software transferred to Communist China (Hughes Aircraft Rocket Guidance Software - Google up “Chinagate”); H.1.b. visa increases; more U.S. taxpayer foreign aid to finance the building of more Nuclear Bombs for/in Israel; presidential pardons for convicted felons, and new laws to benefit their campaign contributor's business, US citizens, foreign governments, and/or to anybody else offering money, AT VERY REASONABLE PRICES.<br/><br/>Maybe Donald Trump is wealthy enough to not be susceptible to the bribery attached to financial campaign contributions that other candidates accepted in return for promises of financial benefits from the US Treasury, or maybe he will want a bigger slice of the bribery pie.
I'm afraid that by the time many Americans educate themselves about government and the Constitution, our democracy may be just a dim memory.<br/>By the way, we were lucky to have Obama. You can now see for yourself what happens when people who vote are uneducated and proud to be fact free.
If Obama is in any possible way corrupt over just receiving money for speeches (something every ex-president has done in recent history) how in the world would you categorize our current crop of politicians?
Carter is the last decent human being to serve as president.  Obama is a sellout like all others to follow.
My gratitude won't survive me.
And the man whose treason took down Carter is celebrated as a working class hero.<br/><br/>Doubling down on every mistake sure compounds people's stupidity.
Is US politics some kind of play act where one is a big fat phony for post-political riches?
Read "The Audacity of Hope" for insight into Barack Obama's conversion the Christianity by Jeremiah Wright.<br/><br/>I think was a compromise with evil to assimilate a false collection of ways to push people's button.
Naive.  No one said he couldnt make money, but $400,000 for his short speech is buying access to his connections not because he is an interesting speaker.  Corruption 101.
America is a country that applauds wealth and success. Mr. Obama has been a spectacularly successful president, whose skills are magnified every time his successor fumbles despite a majority of fellow party members in both houses of Congress. Obama, unlike Trump, is a politician. He was never some sort of selfless saint, as some of his supporters saw him, or an avenging black radical, an image so many of his detractors projected upon him. Now that he retired, he is entitled to participate in the same system that his enriched his predecessors. It is time to take all blinders off, and see him as a moderately progressive politician who happened to be black.
How could he ? He HIRED Penny Pritzker - banking CEO AND housing loan approval firm owner....practically the AUTHOR of the housing crisis, where people who could not afford the mortgages they were given were approved anyways!  Thanks Penny and thanks Obama, for supporting her, lauding her, and showing his true colors.  The only people surprised at this latest Obama move are those that believed the fairytale of his "acendancy story"....
Of course they would be. Anyone who had the experiences and endured the racism in the office of the Presidency who speaks as well as Obama would always be greatly valued by the circuit. Particularly Cantor Fitzgerald.
Susan, here's why many commenters are taking issue with President Obama's upcoming speech:<br/><br/>1. He will be paid a substantial amount of money by a prominent financial institution to give the speech.<br/>2. His administration's record with respect to policing and regulating the financial sector was far less than stellar (no criminal prosecutions from the financial crisis and weakening of Dodd-Frank prior to its passage).<br/><br/>Putting 1. and 2. together leads many to a quite reasonable conclusion that President Obama, while President, was on the take from the financial sector and consciously sought to avoid a tougher stance with them in the hopes of cashing in from them later.<br/><br/>Are you OK with that?
When one of these organizations is having an event for all their partners, big customers, etc. they are spending millions on travel, hotels, banquet facilities, lost billings, etc.   The $400K is not that much of the total bill for the event when it gives them a very memorable, impressive speaker. 
Excactly what I'm talking about.  Trump has created many thousands of jobs by himself for Americans. 
It's not a speaking fee, it's an investment.  Businesses do not give money away, this is an investment.  What turnip truck did you all fall off of? It's a bribe, pay to play, payola.  We choose to pretend it's legal, but it is a bribe. 
??? The left is the party that has moved from the center.  Transgender bathrooms, is that a top issue for the federal government?  That is out of touch.  This is not a commentary on transgender issues as much as the focus from the left on this issue completely ridiculous.  You can go on and on, the religion of climate change while some focus is appropriate to make this a focal point when you have huge sections of the US out of the work force.  This is why the Dems have the least amount of power since the 1920s
If Obama were still running for office, he would care about how he looked to voters, that, however, is not the case.
Or the Obama cabinet before it? Which was also stacked with Goldman alums.
False.  I know that's the party line, but really?!  Did you learn nothing from Hillary's epic fail?
I used to think the attachment of the Democratic leaders to the party's wealthiest donors was minute as well.  Now I think it's Republicans 60%, Democrats 40%.
I agree.  He just gave us 8 very good years plus his years in congress and in community organization in Chicago.  I think he should make money from books and speeches.  I think both of these efforts sharpens a person thoughts about issues.  Also, Wall Street is part of our system and he (and we) need to deal with it and understand it.  We should not be quick to judge how he makes his money will effect his thinking!
"Who asks for less money to do a job?" People who are principled, who have the courage of their convictions.  Actions speak louder than words.
The whole point is HYPOCRISY. It simply proves that his advocacy economic equality was a campaign slogan and he never really beileved or was committed to it. 
Seriously?? "exemplary" Obama used the IRS to attack the opposition party, Obama covered up Benghazi when it was attacked on 9/11 claiming it was a spontaneous demonstration, He gave Iran close to 1 Billion dollars, He backed down from every foreign policy challenge he was given. (except shooting Osama Bin Laden) His economic record when measured by GDP growth is amongst the worst 8 years even including GW (average 1.8% growth, not one year above 3%). So if you are talking about how he looks and speaks you may have a point if you look at what he has done you could not be more wrong.  The proof is Obamas has left the Democratic party in the worst shape since the 1920s.
Right--because that position has advanced so many poor people to greatness and a full life.
As he is vacation with the wealthiest in this country.  Your he needs money to continue his fight is a compete excuse. 
It was sarcasm
By making paid speeches, they've ensured that Michelle has no political future.
The most brilliant political mind alive? He decided to bench Biden to back HRC. How brilliant was that? 
I think you make a significant point.  Wall Street needs to hear what Pres. Obama has to say.
12 million.
Should we instead make it part of the deal that former presidents live a life of austerity, supported by our taxes?  Then we will have one less person to feel envious of.
Maybe we could place a cap on what every citizen is allowed to earn.
No one here is saying he can't collect the $65 million for his book deal. 
This is such a thoughtful question, and we would do well to look back anew at Carter's presidency. One signal achievement was the Camp David accords. Another, perhaps smaller, incident I remember from those times was the way he was pilloried for telling the truth, for example by observing that that the Presidency was a job that no one could do completely right. (He said it far better than my weak recollection.) There were many things on which I disagreed with him at the time, but his integrity and honesty shone out then, and even more now.
President Carter may have been a 'failure' in office according to the poll and other numbers that matter but he is not a failure as a humanist, a man of faith and a man of action.<br/>His commitment to making lives more important in places that many never heard of, to peace in the middle east, to saving children's lives and to making the world a better place is unparalleled.<br/>How many ex-presidents have you seen build houses for the poor?<br/>So, my feedback is that Carter has distinguished himself where it matters...life and in helping others.  He doesn't need to make speeches because in his case, actions are louder than words.
Susan H., My intent in writing the comments was to raise the same question you did.  I chose to explain how others had used their experiences as President to serve others.  I, too, am disgusted by the way the GOP has declared war on the Middle Class since 1980 and the era of Ronnie Ray Gun.  I think that the most significant thing to watch about Trump the way he constantly jeopardizes Homeland Security.  My belief is that he, as his father, is exhibiting grandiosity.  And, like his father, he has dementia.  At 70, Donald is NOT too young to have dementia.  I am not excusing his antisocial, criminal activities.  I bring the dementia up to point out that he has a medical condition that prevents him from fulfilling the duties of his office.  The 25th Amendment MUST be invoked so that Trump can be removed immediately.
I agree Andrew. A book deal is pay for work. The book publishing company takes a calculated risk that the books will sell to a level where their "investment" in the author(s) pays off. High fees for speeches to the same wall street boys that HRC lost the election over is not only ethically challenging and tone deaf, but could fuel the GOP propaganda machine and thereby discourage the average (likely) democratic voter from going to the polls. We have systemic problems that have resulted in the GOP takeover: low registration and turn-out of likely dem voters; the EC; a ceiling on the House of 435 members, set in the 1920s and not adjusted for population growth since; Gerry-mandering; voter suppression. IF-- and that might be long odds-- Obama works on these matters and against the power of money since citizens united-- then the issue of a speaking fee will fade, or even be seen as justifiable as he works on the most important issues of our failing democracy. 
Good girl! Great comments, especially from Obama's "home town" - along with Kuala Lumpur, Honolulu and Nairobi. He was ALWAYS a fraud - couldn't even speak spontaneously to a 2nd grade class without his teleprompter and prepared speech.
Great points, Jerry. Obama had the opportunity to unite this country, but his policies and the "tone" of his administration divided us like no previous president - black/white, rich/poor, liberal/conservative/, private sector/public sector, union/non-union/, gay/straight, feminist women/feminine women. What a legacy!
What's the hangup about speaking? Is it OK for him to make 10s of millions for writing a book? Or if he went into "consulting" like a lot of former politicians do? What line of work would you suggest that Obama take up - only charitable work legitimate at this point?
Glad you enjoy the fact that he's proving his hypocrisy beyond doubt.  But this is typical of the left.  "Two legs, better."
Since Truman? What about Carter?
If leprous politicians weren't selling their influence, there would be no way to buy it. <br/><br/>Read "Extortion" by Peter Schweizer if you want to see the lengths to which politicians go to rape this country's productive generation of wealth.
Candidates raise money for their own campaigns but also for Congressional campaign and Gubernatorial contests.<br/><br/>It is a mistake to look only at what a person raises for his own candidacy.<br/><br/>Republicans, with their various soft and dark money organizations, financed by the Koch Brothers, the Mercers, the Adelsons etc raise a ton of money.<br/><br/>If you want to tie the Democrats' hands ( the only large organized resistance), make sure to apply the impossibly pure standard to them.
One way or another, the Press has already made Obama a saint. And if that isn't enough, he got what is arguably the most prestigious award in the world, the Nobel Peace Prize, almost immediately upon entering office and without having done one single thing to warrant it. In his ensuing eight years in office, he never did; the award was political and from another country, but nobody called it an emolument. Anyway, now he's going to make some dough and hopefully pay taxes on it, and the NY Times objects! Why didn't they object to the Nobel Prize emolument; they certainly would have had it been Trump being awarded such a prize (the mind boggles at the thought, I agree). Hypocrisy, thy name is The New York Times Editorial Board.
Not a saint. Just to act more like Jimmy Carter would be a good compromise.
Aren't there enough emoluments in the job (including lifetime pension ,etc.) for having done an honorable job with its legacy to satisfy one's materialistic craving (e.g. HST and Jimmy Carter).
But during his 8 years, did he fight to reign in the unfettered greed and lazy regulations of Wall St. to prevent the disaster from happening again? Yes.<br/>Which party stripped Dodd-Frank of real, meaningful change? Republicans.<br/>Should people have gone to jail? Yes. A lot of them. That was a huge disappointment that they didn't. As was the failure to investigate the Bush/Cheney administration's Iraq invasion. I imagine there would have been much more to go on there then HRC ever had. But those were the days of Dems still trying to take the high road while Republicans viciously threw mud even where there wasn't any. You think accepting 400k from a WS firm is an indictment of a president who saved the economy (and thus our country)? I'd pay it myself if I could.
Really?  He's taking the quid.  Where's the quo?  What power does he have to grant favors?  What legislation has he pushed to enrich himself?  Did he run a hotel up the street to make money from his visitors?  did he attempt to pass a tax bill that cut his taxes?   Did he conceal his finances?  Get real.<br/><br/>It's the law of supply and demand.  He's in demand and in VERY short supply.  Let him make a buck.  He worked for the good of people for eight years.  You might want to focus more on the current occupant of the WH.  
Hi, Frank -  <br/><br/>The "quo" was bailing Wall Street out at the expense of Main Street, allowing Wall Streeters to literally take bonuses out of bailout money, and not investigating, let alone prosecuting, any of them.
He's worth $12M, has a $400k yearly pension and a $65M book deal. He needs this to pay for tuition?<br/><br/>These kind of speaking fees look like payouts for influence. Not in office anymore? Makes no difference, he is still the most important and influential person in the Democratic Party.<br/><br/>A lot of comments here are clueless and explain why democrats will lose more elections. Holding yourself only to the standard of "better than Trump" is not the moral high ground that inspires voters.
Barack and Michelle signed book deals for $65 million between the two of them.  I'm fairly sure that they'll be able to cover two college tuitions without $400,000 for a speech.  Not saying that he's not entitled to grab the money while he can; but acting like he needs it to pay for college tuitions for his girls is ludicrous.  Plus, I'll be shocked if they don't get scholarships to the school(s) of their choice.
 I bet his kids get a free ride, the more money you have, the less you pay for anything.  
What is the 400k for?
Who are any of us to decide what "he really needs."  Why don't you focus on Trump's graft?  How much money does Trump need feeding at the public trough?
More than his $200K pension.  How much does Trump need is a better question - and more timely.  
I guess we are following in Italy's footsteps - our current leader, 45, is doing same as Berlusconi.  
you stated better than I did...Thx 
To be fair, he also finds time to hang out on a yacht with Geffen, Oprah, Springsteen, and Hanks.
You want to see repugnant and grotesque?  Then pay your $200K for a membership at Mar-a-Lago.  Then you can see it up close and personal.  
I love the combat pay comment!
Uh, ddd - Reagan was paid $1 million per for two speeches in Japan in 1989 after he left office.
Scott, first off how do YOU know that he does not need the money??? Every book on management will tell you how to negotiate to make sure you are paid what you are worth. He's worth this and more<br/>President Obama gave everything to this country as president while taking unprecedented abuse. Why is this a "money grabbing mistake"?? Because he's black?? He will always be known as an an honorable man. What he's getting for speaking engagements or writing books is nobody's business. Not even sure why this is newsworthy 
Maybe you'd like to see him in some poorhouse being genteel and his kids in community college, but what he does for a post-presidency living is none of your business.  And I don't care if Gerald Ford made a billion.  I wouldn't care if Trump made a trillion ------- after he leaves the White House, that is.  
But, Frank, is it YOUR business?
When he ran for election the first time, and the question of his birth was raised, Obama didn't do what any reasonable person would have, show his birth certificate. It would have ended everything right there, if he had one or if he didn't. I don't know why he didn't. I'm not blaming him.<br/>I'm blaming you, and all his other supporters. The Constitution demands a native-born American, and you didn't demand he prove that he was. You just accepted his refusal, and demonized those who did not.<br/>If you were the president of the local bank and I asked for a mortgage on my huge office building but wouldn't show you the deed, you wouldn't give me one. That's just good, and necessary, care.<br/>But you ignored this Constitutional requirement, and still blame others for making it.<br/>What in the world are you thinking?<br/>You ought to be ashamed of yourself.<br/>I'm ashamed for America over what you supporters did instead.
Have you forgotten the Republican Congress who vowed to block every effort Pres. Obama made to improve the lot of Americans?  Have you forgotten that it's the Republicans who are enthusiastic about adventurism abroad?  Bernie Sanders called for all kinds of good reforms, but he never accomplished anything in his long tenure in Congress--passing laws for the commonweal requires negotiation.
Pres. Obama entered his presidency with high hopes.  He was successful in negotiating a health plan having to make many compromises to get it through.  While it needs adjustment and improvement it is a legacy that may lead us to "medicare for all".  I see no problem with him making money, but he must stay true to the mission we joined with him in both of his campaigns to make America a place of hope and caring where we created a society that cared for the least of our residents.  He has a duty to lead the Democratic party to keep it true to his ideals to help, as he is doing, the next generation of leaders.  He may make speeches to the 1% but he should reveal the content and he must make speeches to the rest of America.  In many minds his eloquent and well thought out comments will lead us to a place where taxes are fairly placed on all citizens, the wage earners pay 14% as a bottom line through FICA, if all earnings: dividends, salary, capital gains, etc. paid this minimum to start with we may be able to craft a budget that provides for all.  We must control the biggest cost: the military $600 billion.  Let's not spend that $1 trillion on refurbishing our huge nuclear arsenal but let's find ways, following Reagan's reduction agreements which brought us to the still huge number of 7,500 warheads to a reasonable 500 to 1000. 
Didn't the $65 million book deal alone give his kids a comfortable future?
Well said Linda. He is a good man who must have considered this act before doing so. None of us knows what she would have done  were we in his place.  As you said, Linda, many of us wish we could hace the same leveraging power!
With Cantor-Fitzgerald paying $400K I doubt they're bringing Obama in to deliver a lecture on corporate morality.
No, we will not listen to him.  Sure - let him speak truth to power.  But why demand or accept an obscene fee to do so?  <br/><br/>This fee is based on his job as a public servant.  He is not a baseball player or a movie star.  He is a public servant.  At a time when the public has had it with greedy dishonest politicians, to have someone who claimed to care about income inequality so blatantly contribute to that inequality is seriously damaging to both his party and the country.   Saying 'others did it so why not me" merely perpetuates the damage. 
So you won't listen to him. That is your response.<br/>The man fought for healthcare benefits for tens of millions who could not get it, either because it cost too much or because of pre-existing conditions. Millions more got better healthcare after Obamacare set standards that were not being met. <br/><br/>His stimulus package prevented further damage and turned the economy around. If he had gotten more, we would have had more robust growth, but 80+% of economists say that the stimulus worked. <br/><br/>In other words, he did his job. He did it well. He made mistakes. But there has been no one better at it in my lifetime. And now, as a private US citizen who will never run for office again, he can claim his reward. He can make speeches and charge millions if he can get it. That's our system. 
The President's critics begrudge the man for not taking a vow of poverty.<br/>When religious leaders make millions from their mega-churches, are they held to this high standard?<br/>Mr. Obama, like everyone else, needs to support his family.<br/>If he can get crazy money for giving speeches, he should do as often as he can.<br/>His detractors will continue to complain about him regardless of what he does.<br/>Interesting how the same criticism was not leveled at Bill Clinton when he was speaking and earning thousands after leaving office.
As Hillary so wittily and rightly said: "Well, they offered it to me." <br/><br/>Wittily and rightly? That cost her the presidency. 
Thank you, Jaque, for making this point. NYT wrote:<br/>"But why not elevate a new generation of political leaders and stay true to his values by giving his speech fees to his foundation and other charities focused on those goals?"---how do they know that that isn't his plan from the get go? As we all know from what has happened so far, funding is necessary to support the dissemination of the messages of the resistance. They have quoted Eric Schultz to the effect that the content of Obama's speeches will be "true to his values, his vision, his record." That is what is important. The $$$ lecture fee isn't the issue. I want to learn more about the foundation. 
From a personal perspective, Obama did a great deal to reduce the wealth gap in the US. He helped facilitate the offshoring of most of my coworkers IT jobs overseas. He helped level the playing field on health insurance, by replacing my low deductible, low premium plan with a $20,000 a year high deductible one, that my doctors wouldn't take. Now we have high contributing Americans sitting on their hands and replaced by incompetent, but cheap offshore workers who will steal your personal information, hack your systems and contribute to the trade deficit.<br/><br/>Obama and The Clintons were long since bought and paid for by internationalists.<br/><br/>I can no longer pay for my wife's medical bills or my kids' college. Thanks Obama and his supporters. Thank you for your sanctimonious tripe.
Athletes, actors, singers and musicians bring in revenue through ticket and ad sales.  How does the revenue get brought in when politicians speak to small, invitation only audiences?  Answer: through the influence on the thinking and legislation that keeps the interests of those industries -- and NOT millions of fans -- in the front of the minds of the powerful and influential.
Yes, yes, let's give that chance. Like we did eight years ago. Elected what we thought was a populist president, and what did he do immediately, once he got in? Brought in that despicable deregulator Geithner, who got the banks with their liar loans that tanked the economy OFF THE HOOK. And we, the 99% paid for it. Oh, Obama always has loved Wall St. He admires them. He admires men with money and power.  This is the shadow side of that man. The going after whistle blowers man, the extended the dreadful useless war in Afghanistan, armed Saudi Arabia to the teeth with $80,000,000,000 worth of armaments which Saudi Arabia has used to decimate Yemen, kill men, women and children, put the whole country at risk of mass starvation! Oh, yes, let's give him a chance. Feeding at the trough of Wall St. like nearly all of these politicians. Obama is NO DIFFERENT. Just a pretty populist talker. I voted for him twice. I regret it.  I am sickened by the man. 
need that koolaid fix?
But will he? The weak point of the Obama administration was the failure to prosecute fraud in the financial industry. A recent WP article states that polling data from an NDP study shows that key Obama voters in the midwest shifted to Trump disappointed by the economy. The message of the high speaking fee may be signaling an alliance of convenience between the democrats and Wall Street. 
Politicians can now assume that if they are friendly to big-money interests while in office they will get lucrative lobbying jobs or big money for speeches afterwards.  The influence is being bought and (almost) everybody knows it.
Jon B,<br/>Thanking you as well as Jaque for reminding NYT what matters.
"Not taxpayer money"?  Money is fungible, and Wall Street firms make sure that politicians in both parties keep supporting tax policies that make sure that secretaries pay higher tax rates than their bosses.  Make the connection, and you see that it is taxpayer money.
what center left? in one's imagination maybe. the man was basically a solid republican c 1960.
Indeed, he'd be crazy to turn it down.
Unfortunately, the market has now overrun our political system, meaning that legislation has become a product that only the wealthy can afford.
Can we stop vilifying Wall Street? Anyone with investments depends on its success. Let's focus on reform, not resentment.
There isn't an amount of money that could compensate the hard working people of the US who had their taxes raised, salaries lowered and life made harder by this man in order to reward the lazy and illegal residents of this country, and now he can enrich himself to the point that taxes can't touch his lifestyle.
And for the rest of us, I say we eat cake!
"He served his country well for eight years in a scandal-free administration."<br/><br/>Scandal free? Let's see: fast and furious, Solyndra type Stimulus program failures, IRS, Obamacare launch, Benghazi, AP wiretapping, Veterans Administration, influencing Israeli elections. Lots more. <br/><br/>Obama was a fine president given the circumstances, but his administration was anything but scandal free. Had a Republican been in office for any of these scandals, the blowback would have made the LA riots look like a dress rehearsal.
Try Google.
People who do not hold office cannot peddle influence.
not true, all you need is influence and BO has that in spades.
The celebrities who have access to the Obamas whispered in his ears all these years. These same celebrities continue to influence Obamas' thought processes. These celebrities do not necessarily represent the ordinary American. This kind of celebrity wall that buffer the Obamas from ordinary people is the same wall that surrounds Republicans in a different guise, but same green dollars.
Obama is part of the one percent. He won't always admit it.
Ben Franklin had something to say but he didn't demand outrageous fees from rich donors. 
"i think at some point you have made enough money"  maybe he can donate all the fees to those causes he feels so strongly about.  
"not a single scandal". Come in planet naive,...<br/><br/>Hillary, IRS, VA, Secret Service, office of personnel management, spying on Trump.,..
Paul Cohen,<br/><br/>Spot on.<br/><br/>It is sad that the reaction to the terrible Republican presidents Bush and Trump, has been to lower the standards for Democrats - instead of raising them.<br/><br/>What is really sad, is that news media - NYT especially - has normalized the idea that being beholden to banks (and other donors) is a requirement to be considered "serious", and that anyone challenging that status quo, is a dangerous demagogue.  Not to mention that the standards of that status quo, continue to sink ever lower.  Acceptance of ever increasing corruption, is just as dangerous as demagoguery - the damage just happens more slowly.<br/><br/>One thing that is lost on the oligarchs, is that the typical red state *voters* have much higher ethical standards than is understood.  How to explain voting for Trump?  Well, all politicians are so far beyond the pale, in terms of dishonesty, that they are all bucketed together.  Would you trust someone who only stole $200 more than someone who stole $500?  No.  They are both crooks.  So, that metric becomes irrelevant.<br/><br/>In a time when voters don't like the trajectory of their financial condition, Trump represented possible change. Hillary, surely not.  Why not take a chance?
You're cute.<br/>I hope thats sarcasm.........
I believe that the Obamas have been in the top 1% for some time (income, book deals, ....).  With new book deals and new income opportunities, I suspect we should be or will be talking about the top ) 0.1%.  In any case, I believe it is more what is said than who says it that should matter.
@ Doug Karo "I believe it is more what is said than who says it that should matter."<br/><br/>Normally I would agree. But it's hard to believe that the 99% cannot produce an articulate advocate among its own instead of having to depend on the magnanimity of the enlightened members of the  1% to represent it. 
Please don't insult our intelligences, your right-wing friends' intelligences, as well as your own. When your friends are asked about their "stupid" voting (which I agree, it was stupid), and they say "Better than voting for her!"<br/><br/>At least own up to it and say you agree. Despite your lefty posturing, maybe you sympathize with them more than you think.
Waiting for New Hampshire and Vermont to secede!  Unlikely, because they cost more in benefits than they pay in taxes. Several Southern states do the same. California and New York pay for most of the rest of the country. We should be represented by the number of our votes. Now, that would be fair.
Um, he's already given one speech for 400K. The Cantor Fitzgerald speech will be the second at 400K. And Michelle is giving paid speeches too. 
That is a fairly typical speaking fee for someone at his level of experience and interest. It is ridiculous to equate it to bribery. They are paying him to provide the keynote speech as a draw for their conference. I am glad - I can't think of an audience I would more like to hear his words.
Totally agree - beyond just matking "recommend".<br/><br/>Need to see what Obama says and what he does with the money before we scold him or lose faith. And, jsy to be cleat, I dont think he eas the greatest president -he fell flat on a lot of issues, from closing Guantanamo to prosecuting the bankers who caused the economic collapse to ending wars in the Middle East. But (despite the low bar) he was so much better than what came before and after his Presidency.<br/><br/>Let's not judge the man before the facts (true facts, not alternative facts) are known.
If that is the plan, why didn't the spokesman say that when this furor erupted? 
He knows every detail of the ACA?  He lied about keeping your coverage and physician! I'm hoping your comment was sarcasm.
Why on earth is it okay to get paid for writing your thoughts (in an age when less people read books) but not okay to get paid for those thoughts in oral form?
His spokesperson certainly didn't say it when he confirmed the speech and fee.
He and his spokesperson do not answer to us regarding how he spends his money.<br/><br/>But perhaps they also assumed, as I did, that anyone could see that 400K is a pittance compared to the book deal - and that the speaking fee is gravy to be poured back into his work. I believe that. He shouldn't have to say it. <br/><br/>On another note, what alternate universe are we in where the Times is effectively ignoring the ghastly goings on in the White House, even touting positive "changes" (HA) in the current "president", and picking on President Obama for engaging in some good old fashioned free enterprise? <br/><br/>Ridiculous and truly scary.
Bernie is clearly the hero right now. 
He and his wife signed a $65 million book deal-and gave made millions on prior deals. If you think he is getting $400,000 a speech to help put his kids through college (which I'm sure the tuition is paid for anyway) then I have s bridge to sell you. <br/><br/>These guys ripped off the American people in 2008 and no one went to jail. He hired them instead. This is just good old boy billionaire pay backs.
What pressure do you think is on them financially? They signed a $65 million book deal, have a $200K plus pension for life and free healthcare. 
You're entitled to your opinion; me, I find this morally repugnant. 
Agreed. When Obama starts a bogus university or accepts millions of dollars licensing the rights for golden 0's to be affixed to luxury hotels, I will question it.
I am sick and tired of the double standard and pretentiousness of the 'D" party; hence, like many others, I have switched party affiliation several years back. I view the D-s as much more hypocritical than the Rs, and the Obama's example is pouring more water onto this mill of thought. How much is enough for him!? The $60M+ deal was not, apparently. How much money is he planning to take w/ him to his grave? What a complete hypocrite has he proven to be!
"No, this is nowhere near the level of self aggrandizement the is being performed on a daily basis by President Trump...."<br/><br/>A million wrongs don't make a right. For anyone.
And I will leave a party that acts like jacobins, believes money is bad, banks and corporations are bad in and of themselves, and that wealth would keep a man like Obama from continuing to help and inspire millions.
Even Sanders wouldn't meet your standards.<br/><br/>You are looking for a St. Francis, not a citizen.
I try always to aim high.
I thought about that too. Almost everyone is ASSuming he's going to bank the money and live the high life. I'd like to give him a couple of years and see what he does.
Improper how?
There is a huge difference between Obama cashing in on past experience and Trump using the Presidency, while in office,  to turn a profit for his business.
I recall Mr. Obama expousing a different idea - it was these words almost verbatim - 'At some point haven't you earned enough money?' Maybe he's just not there yet.
He probably isn't. But there are many others who have. Our President for one.
@Early Morning Packer - you have posed an interesting question. I am not fully acquainted with the details, but it is my understanding that when elected Obama basically orphaned Organizing for America as he pivoted into becoming a 1960's Republican president.<br/><br/>I read a lot of people here rationalizing Obama taking the Clinton Path, but the fact is, he could have castrated Jamie Diamond on live Tv in 2009 to cheers, but instead he made sure that Wall Street paid no price.<br/><br/>Remember FDR saying that he welcomed the bankers hatetred? Well, Obama clearly did not.
Please, Wall Street could care less what Obama has to say, it all a sham. To make this any less hypocritical, Obama should just drop by and pickup a paper bag full of money. It's a payoff period, for laying off, the bankers after the crash and having Tim Guitner give him cover, that he was, "saving the world economy."<br/><br/>Obama, made Trump inevitable, by linking the Democrats with Wall St. and the Republicans. Voters, had no real choice. <br/><br/>He has 65 million coming from book deals, and he's got to grab 400K from the people that crashed our economy? A complete sell out disgrace. Some, "Hope and change"!
   You completely missed the point didn't you?  It is not that giving the speech harms the poor, but it benefits the wealthy.  One of which I am certain Obama is yearning to become one with, as if he has not already.  Who would pay Trump $ 400,000 dollars for a speech?  The very same people.  
Who would participate at a fund raiser three years in advance for him while he just completed 100 days in office?
Well, he's tarnished his legacy in the mind of many of those I've spoken with.
The old standard was that you could not take money from industries you HAD been regulating while in office.  For instance it was felt unethical to leave a job such as EPA to go work as a lobbyist for a coal company.  Based on that standard it's unethical to take money from businesses when it was your previous job to prevent one from getting an unfair advantage over another while in office. 
Good point!  Thank you for making clear the difference between a candidate accepting money and a former president accepting money from groups or businesses. 
Right: and consistent with the modus operandi of all socialists: they want to tax everyone else into subsistence living, while they enrich themselves.  It is called hypocrisy.  When socialists become gazillioinaires, that is not consistent with their ideology, and therefore hypocrisy.  If you are a committed socialist, then give away most of your money; speak for free; speak for a small fee; but don't pretend that you are a Man of the People and cash in when you have the chance.
Most liberals still haven't accepted the fact that Obama is corrupt.  Just like Hillary
You've just described the Clinton Global Initiative. 
I guess you missed that he has already inked a 65 million book deal? And collected over $200K a year in pension and free healthcare for life. Not exactly ashes and sackcloth...
I was exaggerating, of course, but it is ridiculous to expect anyone not to take the money if it's offered.  Most of us would enrich ourselves if we could.
How do you know he didn't...or won't?  Some people, unlike the kardasians and their ilk, don't feel need to publicize their charitable donations and philanthropy.
Yes Trump is in a league all to his own, except maybe for Cheney and Rumsfeld.<br/>Subtle corruption is not the antidote however.
The US President is paid $400,000 a year, plus $50,000 for "expenses" and other monies for entertaining, etc.<br/><br/>His base salary is therefore $450,000 a year.<br/><br/>I don't know why you feel Obama got less than that. The salary has not changed in decades.<br/><br/>And remember: while POTUS, Obama lived in the White House FOR FREE, with free food and free Secret Service protection and free travel. He had literally no expenses. He should have saved that money for 8 years -- 8x$450K -- do that math, sir.
@Petey Tonei: 0h come ON!!!!<br/><br/>Yes, college is expensive but let's stop exaggerating. Tuition at Harvard is about $65,000 a year -- and Barack Obama will be getting $450,000 a year, for life, plus free health insurance for his family (for life) and free Secret Service protection for life.<br/><br/>I think $450,000 a year is enough to pay $65,000 in tuition. The Obama's can also borrow, their daughter can get college loans -- or do work-study programs -- paid internships at Wall Street firms.<br/><br/>I wouldn't sweat the load over dear Malia: she is set FOR LIFE. So is her sister.<br/><br/>Look at Chelsea Clinton! $600K job right out of college! and she married a billionaire hedge fundie!
Bankers don't give away free money. They will throw you out of your home for $10,000.<br/>They are not paying ex presidents for speeches. That is a cover.
Yes there is supposed to be a difference between the party of greed and the party of the people.
@NPB: community organizer is CLEARLY an unpaid volunteer job.<br/><br/>So Mr. Obama actually HAD NO JOB, until he was handed a US Senate seat (for being a nice, handsome, tall black Democrat and nothing else).<br/><br/>His family was supported by his wife, who worked as a hospital administrator for a six-figure salary.<br/><br/>They owned a $3 million home in Chicago....so do that math.
They do it for power, and with the power comes the money. They wouldn't be paying Obama $400,000 for a speech unless his power as Ex-President extended to access.
@Janice: but you and other lefties spent the last year EXCORIATING Trump for being "too rich".<br/><br/>In prior elections, you scathingly denounced John McCain and Mitt Romney as clueless, rich snobs with multiple houses and "a dancing horse".<br/><br/>But now that your St. Obama is also a super rich millionaire....it's all OK? <br/><br/>Honey, that's what they call HYPOCRISY.
Actually, Trump may well be doing it for the money.  I bet he's not as rich as he claims!
It only applies to black people. 
Mr. Obama is 56, and has NEVER practiced law. He did graduate Harvard Law School and passed the bar, but never worked as an attorney -- not in research, not before a judge -- never was recruited by any law firms. You'd think with his high grades and being editor of the Harvard Law Review (very prestigious!), he would have been the top earning law student of his class, eagerly grabbed by a white shoe firm for a few hundred grand a year -- but he did no such thing.<br/><br/>He never practiced law at all. He taught a few night classes, part time as an adjunct and worked as an UNPAID volunteer for "community organizations". That's all. Until he was well into his mid-40s.<br/><br/>His wife was the sole economic support of the family, until Obama became a US Senator. Even then, she out-earned him by 100%.
Your comment translates to me, thus: "Should we really expect any politician to identify any longer with working class people, no matter what his origins or rhetoric?"  Your citing of Trump just shows how low the Democratic Party establishment thinking has gone, and lays bare one of the reasons for HRC's loss.
Donating the fee to charity does not redeem this obscene perk of being a former president.  
Because they can't call out Hillary like they can Obama. Clintons are the Machine. Obama is just someone who was hand-picked by the machine/Soros to be our President, revealed by him having S.S. detail a year and a half before his nomination. - sure, Jessie Jackson had it early too, but because he had actually been threatened.
My husband just pointed this out. I think the disaffection of the Democrats with their leadership (the polls showing that Democrats are less supportive of their Congressional Representatives than Republicans are with theirs) is because the Wikileaks and paid speechifying have shown that most Democrats are in and always have been in the same bed with moneyed interests. Only Bernie Sanders ran a campaign where he relied almost totally on his constituents' donations and was not "paid for." Our current disaffection with the Congress is reflective of the fact that many of us are not going back to the business as usual model. The marches and protests are reflective of the same disaffection with business as it has been finally exemplified at its worst by Trump (a billionaire "populist" now populating government and parading policies antithetical to his promises). DNC had better wise up and fast before campaigns of 2018 begin.
Exactly right Tom!! And if progressives want to protest, better to direct their anger at the DNC than anywhere else. And the mass media who worked with them.
Well, let's wait and see then. I don't see that the Clintons signed on to the Buffett pledge (which, like Gates and Buffett have agreed to do, would require them to give away 1/2 of their wealth). Why haven't they? 
"healed"? At least they're healthy.
So he should speak to corporate titans free? He shouldn't have taken none for the book deal, just to ensure that the publisher makes even more? This op-ed is illogical fantasy. If you want Obama to do good, let him earn money from those who are willing to pay, and to use that money for the good of the peopl through his foundation. Giving away money to corporations is silly
"If you're number one objective to inspire a new generation of Democratic leaders then it just doesn't make sense to take $400k from Wall Street,.."<br/><br/>So, Wall Street people can't be Democratic leaders?!<br/><br/>It's this simplistic notion that undermines Democratic leadership and keeps old fogies like Bernie Sanders at the top of the ticket. If Barack Obama can inspire Wall Street to take up Democratic principles, which, it appears by them asking him to speak that they might be ready to consider them, wouldn't that be the best outcome?
Where are the transcripts? If he's doing this, wouldn't he want to share them?
Why doesn't he donate the money to the "marginalized?"  He and Hillary always enrich themselves and hope that government programs take care of others.  He is already receiving $20M for his book.  How much does he "need?"  Shouldn't he "spread the wealth around?" His history of charitable giving is not very good.
Um, at least two now. At 400K a pop. And Michelle has already given paid speeches too. So, no, not ONE paid speech. 
Michelle also worked exhaustively for 8 years, and we paid her NOTHING.  If anyone would like to pay her for her wisdom then I'd be grateful. 
perhaps you'd also like him to wear a hair shirt...
I guess you missed that he already cashed in to the tune of $65 million on his book deals? 
i guess because he always told us what to do with our money.  nothing wrong with the free market, but to be lectured by someone who never held a job about the evils from the free market and "you didn't build that" and "at some point i think you have made enough money" is tiresome and boring to listen to from the guy who sent kids to Sidwell and is now ensconced in a mansion in Kalorama.  not the act itself, it's the nauseating hypocrisy.
I would say you are wrong about the "Mr. Obama".  Every former president has been referred to by the title.  
It cements in my mind Obama was a figure created by people who wanted to see their own values on a blank slate.  When you look back, did he ever really make a hard decision or forcefully come down on a major issues...besides some social issues?  He was always part of the 1%, from his days at Harvard through his voting "present" as a State and US Senator, to his professorial responses to pressing issues.  Now with his office closed, he is showing where his loyalties lie, become part of the "elite 1%."
Didn't the Democrat Party come to it's own for its support of slavery?
In the circles where all that counts is how rich you are, Obama is still a relative pauper.
Harpo-<br/>"It is only important that the exact content of the speech and the fee both become immediate public knowledge".<br/><br/>Yes .How do I know Obama didn't give them Holy Hxxx for the wreakage they caused their fellow Americans?<br/>Now that would be $400,000 justly earned AND well-admired.
Isn't earning 56 million for the books enough? Doesn't taking 400k from Wall Street amount virtually to Wall Street influence buying with a man who will be very influential? Should the large sums for speeches not be considered corrupting. Look at how much the Clintons earned. Apparently it isn't only Donald Trump who is cashing in on the presidency. Jimmy Carter should be applauded.
How about G.W. Bush? 
What does it say that 50 minutes of platitudes is valued at one year of US presidential salary by these Wall Street influence-buyers?
Congress won't even curb its own conflicted interests.<br/><br/>If you want honesty in politics, there does need to be some way to make an honest career of it.
You need some money to be a venture capitalist. And he'll raise funds until he's got enough and until we've forgotten he was supposed to be all about hope and change.
You're only as credible as you are rich in the USA.
And Trump is not "corporatist"?  Hahaha - Trump was/is just better at speaking the short, unintelligible nonsense that his white, blue-collar supporters could understand.  And the many, many corporatists who supported Trump are laughing all the way to the bank!
He still should not sully his reputation earning in such an unseemly way. 
Woman,<br/><br/>The ethnic Germans might not be but The Islamic Terrorists are armed with military automatic rifles and most everyone can access a car or truck!
Rest assured. Chancellor Merkel has protection that you don't see.
The question should be---where does Merkel get her campaign funding? From public funds or from big banks, corporations and the super rich? Thus who has influence over lawmaking and policy?<br/>Do German or EU presidents make speeches to their big banks for big money? That's the obvious question here. Btw their rw parties accept their health care and don't try to destroy it. Unlike our Gop. 
Isn't 56 million in book deals enough to pay the rent? Obama is a young man, he could end up as a sort of lobbyist for Wall Street as administrations change. Who knows the effect on him in his work bringing young leaders up. He admitted there will be an effect. This is an unseemly thing for Obama or any former president to engage in.
Bernie is a socialist with several homes who became wealthy through "public service". His wife bankrupted the university she headed. I can't figure out why democrats think he is a role model.
I agree.  And Bernie has set an example.  I'd now like to see him demonstrate truly effective action, beyond criticism--to organize a coalition of his colleagues--including Elizabeth Warren, Sherrod Brown, Al Franken, Sheldon Whitehouse, Jeff Merkley, and others - to stand united and as an effective caucus of imagination and resistance.  Let's see Bernie lead an effort to address the weaknesses of Obamacare--to add a public option (would address the criticism that consumers have too few choices of insurers), import options for cheaper prescription drugs, and maybe even Medicare starting at 55.  Let them push - together - for something achievable, that would rally the public. <br/><br/>Bernie is a bit of a one-man-band.  It's now time for a progressive coalition to take leadership and connect directly to constituents who are out in front.  
Bernie bought himself a pricey lakefront compound in Vermont after the primaries. Did that bother you?
What bothers me about Bernie is his failure to release his tax returns and his one-man-band approach.  We need politicians to do more than talk--we need them to be more strategic, win meaningful victories for their constituents, and build effective coalitions to move us out of the ditch we're currently in. 
Christine – how do you know that he's NOT going to do that? Or perhaps he'll use the money for his library. He really doesn't owe anybody an explanation.
More fake news spread by people like Mr. Luttegen:<br/><br/>"Former President George W. Bush earns between $100,000 and $175,000 per speech and is considered one of the most prolific speech-makers in modern politics.<br/><br/>The news source Politico has documented Bush's appearances on the speaking circuit and found he's been the keynote in at least 200 events since leaving office.  <br/><br/>Do the math. That amounts to at least $20 million and as much as $35 million in speaking fees he's raked in. Though it should come as no surprise given his stated intention upon leaving off to “replenish the ol’ coffers.”<br/><br/>Bush does his speaking "in private, in convention centers and hotel ballrooms, resorts and casinos, from Canada to Asia, from New York to Miami, from all over Texas to Las Vegas a bunch, playing his part in what has become a lucrative staple of the modern post-presidency," Politico reported in 2015."<br/><br/>Get your facts straight, Richard Luttegen.
Dubya has made paid speeches to many groups and was already wealthy.  So how can you claim he was "unwilling" to cash in?
Dubya has given lots of speeches since then, and been well-paid for them, given that few people wanted to have much visible contact with him because of his disastrous presidency.
Yes, let's see if he release his transcripts. 
Businesses don't create jobs. That paradigm is ending. Businesses create products and services however they can do it the cheapest. That includes automation, heaviest here where wages are highest, and outsourcing to low wage countries, and in-sourcing of illegals and H1Bs. Support business all you like; they won't support you, US worker-consumer. There are plenty of consumers in the rest of the world, and you, US citizen, are just an expense on the wrong side of the ledger. 
If I were a global corporation, and wanted to write a big check to a politician for services rendered, speaking fees seem like a good cover.<br/>Democrats cannot out republican the Republicans. The way for Democrats to win elections is by organizing the poor and middle class to fight for justice. Bernie showed it could be done.<br/>Organize protest after protest, on the cheap, to fight for economic, social and environmental justice, and those protesters and the excitement they create will win you the next election.<br/>Spend your time collecting money from billionaires so you can run negative campaign ads and Democrats will continue to lose 2/3 of all elections.<br/>Corporate law, (local and global), human rights, militarized police, internet freedom vs mass surveillance, mass incarceration, mass media, compromised elections, aggressive militaries, global warming, are all at tipping points that can plunge our world into chaos.<br/>"Lesser Evils" are still evil, just lesser. If the Democratic Party does not want to be irrelevant, it must truly fight for the Greater Good.
Amen
Amen, Mr. Rhett.  Amen.  Thank you for calling this sanctimonious white paternalism exactly what it is.
Many voters are similarly impressed by Trump's opulent lifestyle.  I personally think there is some kind of vicarious thrill involved.<br/><br/>Well, anyway, Obama is getting his payday like all the other pols.<br/><br/>And we don't seem to mind.
I agree.  The New York Times is doing us a disservice by thinking they can report on a Trump issue once and then move on to the next debacle.  Why not keep reporting on the problem!s until you force a groundswell of support?  Keep hitting the point home,not until we get tired of hearing about it, but until the public devices to do something!  Keep up reporting on the lack congressional investigation on Russian interference, keep editorializing about it until those responsible are too embarrassed to ignore it!
What does prosecuting Trump have to do with this. My gosh. This sounds exactly like the "Crooked Hillary" stuff we heard on the campaign trail. Dittoheads on the left are just as bad as dittoheads on the right.<br/><br/>You are entitled to your opinion on accepting $400,000 for giving a speech. I am also entitled to mine. I think that it is disgraceful. The only thing that makes is less than disgraceful is comparing it to what Dubya, Clinton and Reagan did, which isn't company that any respectable person would want to keep.
The question of who pays the fee matters a lot.
I couldn't agree more.  Well said.
Michael, I fully agree. Obama used to be a community organizer and this fee makes it clear how far he has come from that time. One of the few I have seen who can clearly articulate this issue is Elizabeth Warren. She fully understands the corporate forces that victimize the middle class and she is well aware that it is hard to be a politician supporting the middle class while pulling in plutocrat income. Obame is clearly not part of the growing kleptocracy that is our government, but the optics are pretty bad.
This just makes me sick. The most power man in the world should just be like us and go to Penny's and buy his next suit. This man will be more sort after than any other person because of who he is. Is that so hard to understand. Give me a break.
And let's not forget that Trump was also making speeches for big bucks in the lead-up to his candidacy, up to $1.5 million per event. That puts both Obama and Hillary in the shade. So does that make Trump even more compromised morally? Apparently ... except to his adoring base, of course.
He cannot run for president again.  He's limited to eight years.  
While it's true that Obama is not going to run for office again, when you pay a large fee like that, you don't only get access to the former President.  You get access to a large network of powerful people.  That's why so many other former Presidents have earned those fees as well.  The difference is not as clear cut as you present it.
I guess you forgot Hillary actually won, but the fluke of our stupid slave era electoral college is the only reason trump "won".
Ahh, but she's a woman, and he's black. So we have to crucify them for trying to make money. (Which is a dirty word for women and minorities, but a praise word for straight, white, males: all hail the Almighty Dollar, and his son, Trump!) The double standard makes me sick to my stomach.
Yes, thank you for your service.  Here is a speaking fee.  If Bernie Sanders was elected, we would have paid him similarly after his term(s), of course.<br/><br/>No influence peddling here.  None at all.  Nope.<br/><br/>Do you have a prepaid or post-paid cell phone contract?
@Ellen, he can make $400,000 speeches, heck even $1M speeches if some groups is willing to pay it till the cows come home. As long as he is retired from politics. He has already indicated he's going to speak out for Democrats and he is going to stay engaged in the political process as "a leader" of the Party. A good portion of the electorate felt that the Democrats are out of touch with the working class and the middle classes. He's just going to perpetuate that feeling. Just when the Democrats need to become more Progressive and start listening to their former base they will once again lose their way.
Yes, he should give it away, because it's wrong to keep it and it's wrong of the other "public servants" to keep it as well. Wanna know why so many Americans think politicians are self-serving elites out of touch with common folks, why you can't trust anything they say, why there's no point in voting for any of the venal rats? This is a good case in point. When push comes to shove, Obama is out for himself just like Bush, the Clintons and Cheney.
Petey, the NYT criticized Clinton constantly!  You were too obsessed with Bernie's lack of coverage to notice how negative Clinton's coverage was.  Many columnists defended her candidacy because she was hands-down the most qualified candidate in terms of knowledge and experience in the required subject areas.  <br/><br/>I'm tired of people assuming all Clinton support was money-motivated.  Me, I'm just a sucker for ferociously knowledgeable, practical, brilliant, determined, hard-working team players who know policy inside out and want to help people.  
 I completely agree. Indeed ever since Trump did his 180 turn on all his foreign policies in one historically unique swoop, right after basically dumping the vile Bannon, we got praises for the same Trump this paper has almost led a media coup to remove but he now 'presidential' for STUPIDLY and with the support of the MSM and the election losing RNC and their DNC clones launched missiles into Syria (on unproven charges, yet again interested opinion and ''the likely hood' being substitutes for actual proof or evidence just as in the 'Putin put Trump in the White House' rubbish).<br/> So we get articles attacking Obama for not supporting Hillary and the war mongering DNC and their RNC allies, who now despite having lost the election, have the US following THEIR election losing and totally disastrous indeed criminal, destructive foreign policy.<br/> All that matters to the arms dealers and money folk who run us is more money. 1$ trillion in immediate increased sales to a scared NATO to stop 'Putin's panzers blitzing Europe!'<br/> We now have the worst of both worlds now as 'the people' we have Trumps cruel greedy domestic policy and more of the same murderous foreign policy that since 911 has killed at least a million+ and made 10+ millions homeless. Last year 14,000 drowned from Libya alone and from here and our other catastrophe's the refugees pour into a Europe pushed into the arms of folks like Le Pen and the neo Nazis.<br/> But who cares, The Elite are happy, Trump is THEIR plaything now!
I think the criticism of the Obamas is well taken -- but the NYT clearly is trying to rewrite its own disastrous treatment of Hillary Clinton, and how it had its columnists march in lockstep to support her and say nothing good about Bernie Sanders.
Louisa, no. the NYT wasn't "silent" on the issue.  Here's one of their editorials at the time -- they took Bernie's exact position.  Did you miss it, because you were so convinced the NYT was totally pro-Clinton and anti-Bernie?  It wasn't...<br/><br/><a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/26/opinion/mrs-clinton-show-voters-those-transcripts.html" title="https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/26/opinion/mrs-clinton-show-voters-those-transcripts.html" target="_blank">https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/26/opinion/mrs-clinton-show-voters-those...</a>
Excellent point!
Why should he take heed? What is it about black people that brings out condescension and patronizing tone in us all?
"...presidents (and their families) who don't wait until leaving office before cashing in...<br/><br/>So - you'd presumably be appalled by a would-be president (and her spouse) who would cash in, before even entering office...
Not bad, Outside the Box.
better post presidential ethics? ... Jimmy Carter ... <br/><br/>he's been much better at maintaining a highly principled standard since leaving office ... consider his work with Habitat for Humanity or his international efforts to draw attention to fair and open political elections ... <br/><br/>I've never read a story about his lucrative "speaking fees" ...
I stand corrected!
I agree with all of your points except the part about no one in any office serving as an example.  Bernie Sanders is the least wealthy senator in office -- no surprise, given his progressive politics -- and Elizabeth Warren has admirably taken on the banks for their fleecing of consumers and laundering money for drug cartels.  Let's be sure to give credit where it is due.
His brand? Please don't confuse Barack with the present Grifter-in-Chief.
I am tired of worrying about "public perception" when it has to do with O who worked so hard for us &amp; without a scandal when in office......while fighting the Repubs. <br/><br/>Where were the "public perceptions" concerns when this country it elected a man such as Trump?!!
As he is now a private citizen now and not in a position to dictate public policy I am at a loss to see why he should turn it down. The Times makes a note that every president before him has done it and yet it can state no ill affect. 
I eventually realized that It wasn't Barack that convinced me that he was interested in changing the system, but it was Michelle's speeches that implied he was going to govern from the left.<br/>I don't even believe she meant it anymore.
As Obama, I do believe in pragmatic governing and tweaking the system. Wall Street has an important role as long as it is well regulated and properly taxed. Obama had used his chances to reign in WS quite well though many would agree he could have done more. <br/><br/>But the system as whole is manageable. We now know that the difference between Obamacare as it is now, and Obamacare with public option, was 1 (one) Lieberman vote in the Senate. A very close call that would have changed this country health care system much more dramatically. So there is a great potential, voters willing, to overhaul the system.  However, at present we are stuck in a 50/50 stalemate where it is much easier to "deconstruct"  or undermine the government functions than to build something useful for this country, which gives the anti-government forces much more power to thrive. And leaves the plutocracy free to continue extracting the wealth.
GarrettClay, payola for what, exactly?  The guy raised taxes on the wealthy through the ACA.  He also pushed some controls on the banking industry, against unprecedented Republican corruption.  He's got no juice at all with the current administration, so there's no sense oiling him for future favors.  <br/><br/>I don't get what your argument is based on, except "Who would pay famous people a lot just to talk?  It must be 'payola'!"   For heaven's sake, our society is drowning in famous people paid absurd amounts to stand around and talk.  Of course our 44th President is one of them.  He's informed, brilliant, eloquent, witty, and historically unique.  That's him, not payola.  
Until/unless he releases the transcripts (which I hope he will to stop this biting commentary), you cannot fairly judge if this is deferred compensation. If any president (excepting President Carter) deserves the benefit of the doubt, it's President Obama.
First of all, do not assume I am an Obama detractor.  Between his two campaigns, I, as a semi retired person, donated over $3000 to see him elected and then re-elected.<br/><br/>The problem is, if this is accepted for Obama because he is "clean", it will set a precedent for others not so clean.   <br/><br/>Any lawyer knows that in matters involving conflicts of interest, actual conflicts, and appearances of conflicts, are to be avoided.  In an earlier life, I was part of the New Jersey utility regulatory process, and had a lot of discretion of what I would challenge, versus what I would let ride.   If, after I left that post, I accepted a $100,000 honorarium from a utility company for a 45 minute speech, someone would have had my head.
To you, maybe, but as you can see, not to most. There was no hint of corruption when he was in office; and no valid reason to suspect it now.
So MG the man should live as a pauper and refuse to get paid for speaking with people who wish to hear him? Do you refuse your emoluments? I bet you have no problem asking for a raise when you believe it is appropriate. Come on now.
If he understood it, then why did the presidency and congress swing to the Republican side? Clearly he did not. And I like him a great deal and voted for him twice. But let's be honest here.
Henyrspencer: Your statement is a caricature of my view. Who suggested that he live as a pauper? 
 My comment to a comment  was posted, but awfully hard to find since the email response from you did not allow me to link to it, either at the top of the page or within a page.  Could you resend it?  I commented around 9  - 9:30 this morning EST.  Thank you very much.
=====<br/><br/>Phenomenal piece!<br/><br/>The best metaphor that I've seen in months is Mr. Blow's comment that Trump has the "intellectual depth of a coat of paint"!<br/><br/>What a telling phrase, which actually does a disservice to a coat of paint because it usually hides flaws!<br/><br/>Elsewhere, I see the Times is quoting people (Jon Meachem and others) who are lamely trying to explain or excuse Trump's ignorance about Jackson and the Civil War by saying he must have had the 1832 Nullification Crisis with South Carolina in mind!<br/><br/>You have to be kidding us!  Trump only recently even learned who Jackson was and you can be sure he has no idea what nullification is or what happened historically!<br/><br/>It's a sorry excuse and an embarrassing, patently weak, attempt by the paper trying to be balanced.<br/><br/>I especially liked what Gingrich said, trying to cover it all up:<br/><br/>"Trump’s not a student of history. Trump’s an extraordinarily successful, entrepreneurial personality who learns what he needs to know when he needs to know it. Trump is learning history as he governs.”<br/><br/>A stellar example of damning with faint praise!  <br/><br/>1. Trump is not a businessman (or student of history), but an "entrepreneurial personality"! :-)<br/><br/>2. "learns what he needs to know when he needs to know it."  <br/><br/>Not what you want in a president!  He (or she!) needs to have a deep understanding of history and global relations *before* a crisis happens. <br/><br/>3.  "Trump is learning history as he governs.”  <br/><br/>That's a commendation?!  LOL!<br/><br/>=====
“Those who know nothing of foreign languages know nothing of their own.”<br/>~ GOETHE
Sounds like most of his voters.  I know, I know, we're not supposed to talk down to them, but geez.  My mother with a high school education would not let me get away with that, and oh boy, my late mother-in-law a high school English teacher would scold this University of California professor for dropping the "g" of present progressives.  I loved her, and I'm somewhat glad she's not here to witness the dumbing of America.  For the print journalists, the contrast between Trump and Obama must be stark.
Perhaps he has some as of yet undiscovered facility with the Russian language. 
You can say all you like about President Trump's language but it certainly won him the election.  People liked what they heard and did not like the message of Hillary Clinton no matter how perfect her English sounded (and that is debatable).  <br/><br/>What counts are the results and Mr. Trump won the presidency.  Mrs. Clinton lost and you cannot accept this and never will.
Sadly, Trump is a reflexion of the people who voted for him.<br/>So they love him.<br/>Many liked 'W' for the same reasons.<br/>They hated Obama because he was articulate and many thought that Obama was talking down to them.<br/>Many of Trump supporter didn't graduate high school so when he speaks unintelligently, they feel he sounds like them.<br/>That was also evident when he spoke in the raunchiest terms, openly admitting that he will take advantage of anything he could if it isn't nailed down, and spoke 'fighting words' to the point of bullying.<br/>Obama tried to conduct himself in a way that one GOP called uppity,<br/>So we have that 48% that Romney talked about, now voting on of their own into office.<br/>Wow, talking about the dumbing down of America.
I can guarantee Trump wouldn't have understood this article, because the words are "Too big...too huge".
How do you know that Liberals are loosing their argument?  They focus on you grammar and spelling.  WINNING!
The Junk Presidency of Trump is expressed by his whispery sociopath-speak. Where is the ethics investigation? Where is the Special Prosecutor?
Truthless Trump - two words that need repeating.
Botton line, the president of United States doesn't even speak English
We know that Trump has read at least one book, apart from “The Art of the Deal”.  We have it from one of his ex-wives that he used to read a collection of Hitler’s speeches at bedtime!
Donald Trump's supporters have in the past felt so marginalized that they would have voted for a talking parrot if it sounded like Trump--grammar and common sense be damned.
I keep wondering if the severely limited vocabulary is a sign of dementia.  
Charles Blow does not like / approve of President Trump. We get it. Yawn. 
Thanks for this very well-written piece, CB, on Trump's degradation of the language. <br/><br/>If it was not for Trump's degradation of the language, I am certain he would be nominated for a fiction award, assuming tweeting could be considered a medium for a respected literary form.
Many of Trump's followers don't speak like him.<br/><br/>Their syntax is perfect.<br/><br/>Therein lies the danger.
My friends and I have analyzed and discussed the glaring deficiencies in Trump's speech for months - or tried to.   You, Mr. Blow, summarize it insightfully.  Thank you.
There is another explanation: that Trump suffers from neurological decay. If you watch a 1980 NBC interview with him on YouTube, you see that he was fully capable of speaking in complete sentences with an adult and appropriate vocabulary then. He seems almost personable.<br/><br/>While some of his language degeneration today may be an act, the reality may be even more frightening. His model Ronald Reagan also proved to be suffering from Alzheimer's, which set a "president" for "plain speaking."<br/><br/>What is almost more alarming is the fact that such a large part of the electorate finds such mental decay appealing. And let's not forget that Trump spent the 80s swinging at Studio 54, when cocaine and qualude abuse in his circles was rampant (just ask his friend Larry Kudlow).
I see Trump as a point on the global warming continuum.  Birds are moving north, fish are heading for cooler waters, vegetation is either moving or adapting.  Humans sense catastrophic change is coming too.  They're arming themselves, closing borders against migrants, electing strongmen to protect them with force if necessary, and generally closing ranks.  Trump's incoherence will matter little in the face of global disruption.  What will topple him will be incompetence in the wake of a catastrophic event.  Once his strongman bubble has burst he'll be swept aside.
Trump's improper use of language is not important.  His people want a return to the exceptionalism that used to be the theme of public discourse, regardless of how it is phrased.  It would not be any different if he used proper English, because, to those who want to believe, hollow promises can be made appealing in any style of speech.  Just look at the success of Bernie Madoff among educated New Yorkers.  So let's spend our time pointing out the many inequities of his actual policies, and eventually the language he uses will not matter.
The 4 stages of learning:<br/>I don't know that I don't know<br/>I know that I don't know<br/>I know that I know<br/>I don't know that I know<br/><br/>Donald is still at stage 1. He says anything he wants,whether it is true or not. Unfortunately,this is true of many of the people who voted for him. Failure to admit ignorance about the job one is doing can only lead to more failure. This will not end well,for all of us.
We live in the United States of America and whether we like it or not, this is a country where people are measured by their success, and not by how many books they have read. Under President Obama, people like the Kardashians were invited at the WH several times. I don't think they are known for reading books.<br/>Mr Trump is the one sitting in the Oval office. To get there Mr. Trump beat the Establishment, an establishment, full of people who read books. 
I truly believe that Trump will be judged as one of the worst of our presidents.  But perhaps he has done the nation a tremendous favor.<br/><br/>Up until Trump's election, those of us who follow our students' progress, were content that the voting public had the knowledge and sophistication to produce wise, well-educated leaders.  After all, doesn't our democratic system demand that we make intelligent, informed choices?  Barack Obama--well-read, well-spoken--is a case in point.  Whether you're a Democrat or Republican, you knew that he was a well-educated man.  We could be proud of an educational system that could produce such an individual.<br/><br/>Then along came Trump.  We have cut into what we thought was a tasty apple--and found worms inside...the 46% who voted for him.  We have thus been forced to admit that all is not right with our schools, whether they are public or private (Trump).  And they desperately need fixing.  Thank you for bringing this to our attention, Mr. President.<br/><br/>But how do we fix this?  We face enormous challenges because, in many ways, this is more disturbing than a North Korean missile, because it's part of OUR fabric!  Scarier still, is the thought that Trump may wish to keep Americans as ignorant as he!  Can the appointment of Betsy DeVos as Secretary of Education be greater proof?
This is the real problem with this guy's Presidency. A complete abandonment of common manners that most children learn by the time they are 8 years old. <br/><br/>The generation of children growing up watching this are bound to be the most ill-behaved this country has ever seen. <br/><br/>All this for a Supreme Court seat.
When I see past clips of Obama speaking it feels like a punch to the gut, a reminder of how far we've sunk. What have these Fox News watching people done to this country?  Are they really oblivious to Trump saying whatever he thinks will make him look better in the moment, no matter how false?  I feel the same way when I listen to Trump speak as I did years ago when I bought a used car off a lot, which is to take a shower to wash myself of the smarmy creepy experience.
Tortured language is but a fraction of Trump's assault on the senses.<br/><br/>In just 100 days, the gravitas of the office of the presidency has evaporated. Only a circus remains--replete with bloviating carnival barker, jugglers, and assorted sideshows.
I absolutely love and support the people and ideas I feel as though I should love and support, given the fact that I have read this piece.
English is such a rich language, the O.E.D. is so huge.  It's a crime that people's vocabulary is limited to a hundred words.  'bad man',  'not nice'.  I can't tell whether it's indicative of total ignorance or a deliberate attempt to connect with 'everyday' people.  I'd like to this stereotype of the 'average' person was untrue.  But unfortunately his manner of speaking  reminds me of someone I know:  " It was very pretty".   If something is better then " It was very, very pretty."  Better  still?  then -- "It was very, very, very pretty."  Apparently synonyms are unknown or the speaker is too lazy to reach for them.  It reminds me of a group of students who denied plagiarizing a paper: "How many ways can you say something?"  Shakespeare would cry.
Thank you for this moving article. At least we've got you here carrying the torch on the language front! It must have been bad luck that I read two pandering pieces in the NYT yesterday, mercilessly generous toward djt and his "world view". Or whatever it is. I'm glad I read this - it was very cathartic.
I agree that Trump's English is poor.  As a New Yorker, I watched his  incredible rise as a successful realtor and developer since the 70s. However, nowhere in this atticle is there an actual empirical example of his speech.  I am surprised the New York Times did not provide that here.
Trump supporters celebrate his degradation of the language by saying it proves he's "transparent."  If I hear one more Trump voter say he's the most transparent president we've ever had I will shoot myself on 5th Avenue.  I guess making up words telling lies and being rude, sexist and racist is their definition of transparency.  They don't seem to care if he lies about everything, has filled the swamp with the elite among elites,refuses to release his taxes, separate himself from his businesses, provide visitor logs, and the list goes on.  I don't know who's dumber--Trump or the people who support him.
If someone talks to him, ask him to define, ( what does he mean) by his constant use of the words beautiful, Great, tremendous, etc, and his other not defined bromides 
Mr. Trump would not know the meaning of a 9th grade vocabulary word even after it was explained to him.  He simply has no imagination or care outside his own narrow interests.<br/><br/>That said, poor grammar, usage, and spelling are becoming endemic in our world.  I used to edit other college-educated peoples' work and it was just embarrassing how much I had to correct.
Deconstructing of  eccentric's lingo fascinates, while:<br/><br/> DJT expertly wins ratings.<br/><br/>Novelty trumps  conventional.<br/><br/>Masses enjoy gratuitous anti orthodox/anti establishment.<br/><br/>Glib jibe wins.<br/><br/>Demagoguery exploits folks' anger<br/><br/>Pundit's debunking notwithstanding.
I'm waiting for the uproar when Trump in his statements before a grieving mother and widow calls a fallen marine, over his casket, an exemplary hero and member of the Marine Corpse; and then he repeats this mispronunciation often, even after being corrected. It's corpses, not corpse. What a blatant disrespect and arrogance.
I too can not remember a hateful word form our current VP.<br/>Contrasting that with the now famous speeches and comments made by our 44th, 35th, 34th, 32nd, 26th and of course 16th president, none of whom our current so-called president can name.<br/>Was the civil war necessary? I say to him he should contact Jefferson Davis to get to the bottom of that.
The man tells it "like it is," but it should be "as it is." Who knew language would be so complicated? He would be just another ignorant buffoon, but he became President because the rest of the buffoons in America showed up to vote. The "man" is embarrassing. He can't even get the simple facts straight, and when someone calls him on it, like Mr. Dickerson did the other day, Trump turns his back on him and walks away in a display of the worst manners possible. There is nothing good about this man. He is a disgrace and he's dangerous, essentially because even his Id doesn't know what it is doing.
I am so relieved that someone has brought this up in the Trump conversation.  It's so painful to have to listen to him try and struggle to,.... (I was going to use the word articulate but that is not even close to accurate, I will use something more Trump-like),....try and struggle to 'make language'.  <br/><br/>I have an interesting exercise - If Ronald Reagan was the 'Great Communicator', what do you think Trump's moniker will be???<br/><br/>Possibly the 'Grate Speeker'???? 
As an educated person you can't listen to him. It's a torture to read him. And English is my third language.  For native speakers it must be sad. At least, if  you care about your language. 
It's long since the time that Congress should pass a law requiring that Presidents of the United States speak English.
I'm starting to understand that Trump's amorality, including his lies, are not only "tolerated" by his base, but essential to his appeal. In their own minds, Trump voters have had the "facts" shoved down their throats for years, facts that legitimized their getting the short end of the stick over and over again. Then, along comes Trump, who "gets his" by sticking it to everybody else -- grabbing women, reneging on agreements, lying and cheating to suit his whims. What he's really selling the voters is the idea that they, too, can do the same. What they see (and he confirms) is a world whose institutions are already rigged against them; therefore you HAVE to cheat and lie to come out on top. <br/><br/>The Trump presidency is really the Trump University scam writ large. Vote for me and we'll stick it to those snotty elites together, the way I've been doing for years, and you'll come out on top, just like me. 
It's true, of course. Trump has taken the rhetorical lessons of previous sleazeballs, taken it down to his native vocabulary level, and overlayed it with reality TV bombast. The result is a President whose base has projected their contradictory hopes onto him. Yet nobody takes what he says at face value, so any time he betrays them he doesn't even have to answer for it.<br/><br/>The media and the political class created the conditions for this. For years, the GOP has gotten away with repeated assaults on the terms of political discourse, and the press has let it slide, without fail. Take "conservative". By ceding its meaning to the GOP brand, we allow radical right-wing reactionaries to bludgeon their way into the political mainstream. You can ask 30 Republicans what "conservatism" means and get 30 different answers, but that's wrong. It has a specific meaning.<br/><br/>The media enables this with its zealous devotion to false balance and the lie that "all viewpoints are equally valid". Predictably, this extended itself to words. The truth cannot possibly survive in such an environment. It isn't just the press, of course. A recent DHS report defined closing an oil pipeline valve as "violent terrorism". Corporations do the same as the GOP: turn words into brands, or cushions in which to couch their repugnant ideas.<br/><br/>Humans? Capital.<br/>Citizens? Consumers.<br/>Safety net? Entitlements.<br/>Invasion? Boots on the ground.<br/>Dissent? Violence.<br/><br/>Orwell? Prophet.
Crazy like a fox.  True, he has nothing to say.  However also true that he intentionally talks the way he does because he does not wish to say anything. He only wishes to *imply* things.  This is one of the things I despise about his cowardly personality.<br/><br/>He's clearly not a verbal person to begin with.  Which is fine for a salesman -- keep it simple, warrant nothing and sprinkle in heavy amounts of hyperbole.<br/><br/>Now, as for his fans -- please head over to Breitbart and treat yourself to their comment section which Bannon claimed is the heart of the publication.  His fans intentionally speak a sort of pigeon English in order to distance themselves from any group of people who know more than they do.  Which would be everyone.  They are mocking their own ignorance all the while using it as some sort of secret handshake to the likeminded. They are puffed up with pride about being no-nothings and they "hate" anyone who makes any effort to learn.<br/><br/>So Trump's language is an intentionally cultivated situation which takes good . advantage of his natural language skills which are very limited.  Who knows what his blabber translates to in foreign languages.  One shudders to think.
Trump is a cross between Caligula and Dan Quayle.
Mr Trump is the president of the United States. I'm getting tired of the idea that somehow Mr. Trump is a stupid person. If that is the case, we will have to redefine the word "stupid".<br/>Mr Trump beat the two establishment parties of the U.S by himself. First the republicans in the primaries, then the democrats and most republicans in the general election. Mr Trump had the most negative press coverage of any presidential candidate in the history of this country, yet he won. 
Please show us your college transcript and diploma, Mr. Trump.<br/>High school report card, too.
Its seems churlish to blame our president for the beliefs of his supporters.<br/>Usually the process of growing from child to adult involves the loss of naivety, replacing it with a worldly eye which can spot the deceivers as they edge closer.<br/>The language used by the president is simple because the most cherished lies are simple - I will bring jobs back, I will keep you safe from harm, I will always put you first.
I think an increasing number of people prefer to be led down the garden path with simple rather than sophisticated language, New York Times. You just don't get it. I dislike your never-ending single viewpoint.
For plain, unsophisticated, unvarnished, working class English language, we have Donald Trump. Tweets suit him perfectly. He can deliver them even while seated on the John. It is easy to remember what he said. <br/><br/>For more slick, sophisticated, almost devious, all varnish, but incomprehensible English language, listen to Mike Pence, Trump's VP. I can generally remember nothing of what he said in his Meet the Press or Face the Nation interviews. Like Trump’s tweets, his statements are also lies, but sugar coated.<br/><br/>There is an endearing quality about Trump's tweets. They are short, frequent, to the point,  abundant, and entirely comprehensible.
Trump mumbo jumbo seems to be purposeful and oblivious. To a critical thinking person these distinctions are obvious and unconvincing. It is most impactful and entrancing to his populist base.    Trump's simple verbal style reflects his simplistic world view and limited intellect. This sits well with his voters. When he speaks it's music to their ears. The fact that he is lying becomes irrelevant. <br/><br/>But the danger of Trump-speak isn't so much immediate as it will foreshadow the degradation of American education. Anyone who knows better is reviled not beguiled by Trump word salad. However, if our children are raised in an environment of vague speak and 'dumbing down' those who would destroy democracy will have truly won.
Some people are fooled by "articulate" speech, confusing verbal eloquence with wisdom. It ain't so.
The problems with Donald Trump are as stated to numerous to count. But what lead to this state of affairs is his upbringing and stature in his business world. His father was the absolute boss in his privately owned business world. No one  corrected him and taught him the proper and correct way of talking and running a company. He didn't need it. Donald has never answered to board of directors or shareholders of that same privately owned conglomerate. If you didn't like the way he did things or what he said, you could leave or were asked to leave.<br/>Presidents of most companies rise to the top because of the ability to communicate and convince people around them. There are few who did not follow that line and still make it, Steven Jobs comes to mind and in part got him fired by a board of directors from his own company because it had become a publicly traded corporation. He got hired back again though. But Trump didn't have to answer to anyone before now. He didn't have to take in consideration anyone else's thoughts and opinions. Nor did any person have the power like the Supreme Court to tell him is wrong. What I find difficult to understand is that some well educated, even my own daughter, buying into his schemes.<br/>On a side note for Trump and Americans on trade with Canada. Does he understand the effects in the exchange rate of our dollars. 35% is huge advantage or disadvantage in the price of goods. 
pernicious. sophistry. parataxis. intellectual depth. disassembling of rhetoric. he watches tv. <br/><br/>I don't know what any of this means.<br/><br/>Degradation of the language is one of Trump’s most grievous sins. <br/><br/>This, as a Lutheran, I really don't get.
"Degradation of the language is one of Trump’s most grievous sins."<br/><br/>And, as an example, it's all too easily repeated and replicated, i.e.. the phrase "fake news". Propaganda has always existed and it's always "fake news". Trump didn't invent it but he's used it his entire professional life. Call it propaganda or call it bullying or lying, it's how he's operated his entire life. There's nothing new there. In fact, with Trump, there is no there there...he's just a shallow narcissist who thinks that disrupting and destroying is leadership. It's not, and he's a huge, empty bluff that's sure to implode at any minute. If we're lucky.
If you want to understand our "Insane Clown President", please, PLEASE read Roger Ebert's review on "Being There", a wonderful Peter Sellers movie about an intellectually limited gardner who dresses well and "likes to watch T.V."<br/><a href="http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-being-there-1979" title="http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-being-there-1979" target="_blank">http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-being-there-1979</a><br/><br/>Peter Sellers NAILED the Donald's personality and the inane following by people who think because he dresses like a rich man, he must be profound.<br/>Not!
Get off your high horse, elitists. Don't you know Twitter limits the number of characters in a Tweet? Trump's speeches are fine to Americans who are fed up with the political elitists who bled us dry. It's more important to get things done than having Obama's lawyerly but hollow sophistication. 
I'm keeping it simple, because that is how Trump likes it. Oy vey, God help us all.  Okay, for the rest of us, i.e., people who read above a 5th grade level - God help us all.  Sorry for the redundancy, but I have a little story.  My husband, who is a PhD scientist, actually checks his spelling on his Facebook posts because one of his High School friends will correct him if he's wrong.  We need more English teachers!  Oh, forgot about Betsy.  Darn.
Trump Is a salesman.<br/>Making the sale is all that matters to him.<br/>Whatever it take is the game plan.<br/>Real estate salesmen are no more honest than used car salesmen.
Trump speaks English as if it were a second language that he has just learned;  using the same words over and over because those are the words he can remember. The accent is not bad, but the vocabulary is horrendous. Perhaps if he read, he could improve his vocabulary.
Why? Trump famously ponders causation of the civil war. We struggle with his gibberish. He clearly is the intellect. We are the stooges who elected him.
I also don't and never will use the word "President" when referring to Trump. I really don't think of him as president. I just can't.
"Trump has the intellecutal depth of a coat of paint."<br/>Thanks for giving me a good chuckle, Charles. I needed that.
Degradation of the country has been of greater importance to me  than what he does to the English language.<br/>Let's keep things in perspective.<br/>At this rate you will be citing his length in ties as the greatest insult he has leveled on civilization.
I thought that w was the first US president who could not speak English.<br/>Who knew we would be in for a string of ingnorance and illiteracy with another republican in the White House?<br/><br/>A perfect Jeopardy question, category: Presidents.<br/>For 2000, who was the first US president who could not speak English?
Believe me, I will tell you that. Very very...believe me.
In my next life, I hope I get back all the time I have spent in the past year having to think, read and (aka here) write about stupid.  
This is the Brave New World in which the sewage rises to the top. The world has changed so dramatically that the sewage itself doesn't even try to conceal itself but trumpets (sorry) its filth.
Actually most people can't put a coherent sentence together - just look at most comment sections (Times readers being an exception). In this regard Trump is the norm not the exception. Forest Trump IS America. 
Those of us who care are in the minority. The rest are busy not reading, listening to music meant for teenagers, playing video games...and electing dangerously unqualified people to office.
Degradation of the language is not one of Trumps most grievous sins.  Even if you write for the New York Times you must be able to acknowledge that sexual assault makes language use pale by comparison.  It is not his language that's the problem - it's the man behind the words.  The most accurate part of this article is one sentence: "Trump has the intellectual depth of a coat of paint." Yes indeed. He also may have a learning disability, a comprehension problem, a processing problem and utter, total lack of empathy for others, being only focused on himself, his money and how he can use his power to get more money and further oppressive ideals.  What he does to language? Who cares.  
For some time, I've not been able to stomach listening to Trump. In part, this is due to the offensiveness of so much of what he says. In part, however, it's  due to my unwillingness to waste time listening to someone who so clearly has so little respect for language: for its capacity to engage and communicate, for its rhetorical sweep and beauty. Following, as he does, on Obama's heels, it's particularly difficult to observe how much air time he receives, how his utterances are parsed (with increasing desperation) by pundits looking for meaning. Thank you, Mr Blow, for highlighting yet another aspect of our world that he threatens - instead of being a model for discourse, like some of his predecessors, or at the very least an able player, he appears to be consciously dismantling the structures of language, in the same way that he is tackling the stability of others of our (previously) presumed inviolable institutions. 
Mr. Blow misses the whole point. Like him or not, Trump is the greatest retail politician in our history, and when he makes mistakes in grammar, uses hyperbole, his supporters love him all the more, because many of them do not speak the King's English either. Turn on any news channel at any time of the day, and newscasters find nothing else of interest to talk about except Pres. Trump.He has "it," and everything he says stirs controversy. Dislike of him is often spurred by envy.Fine journalist and a good fellow, Mr. Blow should find another "violon d'Ingres," another favorite topic to write about. CNN loves Trump, and he makes hundreds of millions for the network, and the more he criticizes  news reporters, the media, the happier they are because their ratings spike as a result.Am sure Jim Acosta's popularity on the lucrative college lecture circuit as a result of his being singled out by The Donald took a jump upwards, and his fee as well.
Trump reminds me more and more of an American David Brent, Ricky Gervais' cringeworthy executive in The Office. Would that he too were confined to an office park in Slough. <br/><br/>This is our new political reality. The worm has turned. <br/><br/>Elizabeth Warren and other intelligent, erudite Democrats don't stand a chance against him. They make too much sense. Perhaps someone like Charlie Sheen, Bruce Willis (as John McClane) or a Kardashian in 2020.
Trump really is the bigoted &amp; mean spirited version of "Chauncey Gardener".
He doesn’t need proper English.  He is wired differently.  He doesn’t think.  He feels.  Much like a higher order animal, his brain is designed for dodging, weaving and attacking, for surviving, continuing the blood line and maintaining dominance.  There is no law preventing him from calling out women’s looks &amp; men’s weaknesses, so why not?  When the law defeats him, he settles out of court &amp; moves on.  His new government position requires understanding that we are all in this together.  A lion is incapable of grasping that concept.  Why should he?
Love those big, beautiful words, Mr Blow.  I'm wondering if the Trumpet can pronounce any of them, much less define them and use them correctly in sentences.  I laughed through your commentary, particularly at those "telling" words, to wit:  pernicious, insidious, sophistry, gibberish; parataxis, dismiss, limelight; utterly frightening, pundits, impulses, ineptitude, unintelligible, degradation of the language.<br/><br/>Wow!  That's harsh!  And the Trumpet deserves every stab you took at his ineptitude (that's my favorite descriptor of this narcissistic fool who loves the limelight.)<br/><br/>Mr Blow, if you ever have the opportunity to interview the Trumpet in private, throw some of your tremendous, rally tremendous words at him and let us know if he understands your erudite language.  Taking bets.......
It all boils down to an education Mr. Blow.<br/>Something most Americans are not properly receiving.<br/>It's called dumbing down the electorate and it works, very well indeed.<br/>Look no further for evidence as to who is now leading our country.
I'd liked like to see a column dedicated to analysis of what he really is.  Is he just or only a shyster, liar, sleeze ball, mysoginist, psychopath, idiot-savant, con-artist, serial harasser? Or all of those things. I'd like to hear from experts exactly how we should refer to him.  And how does he compare to other deviants who came before him?<br/>I want to use the right words to describe him.<br/>Please NYT, do this for the nation.<br/>Maybe a panel of psychiatrists, linguists, historians FBI profilers, bankruptcy lawyers, other criminals, other con-men, people who know his stichkt. 
You miss the point: he's not speaking to you (or your ilk). Like Tony Soprano, when he wants to get your attention, he first breaks your nose, then follows up with a knee to the groin. Trump gets it that many Americans are less interested in words than action. They may not be "literate" but that doesn't mean they're stupid. 
<br/>Mr. Blow:<br/>one conclusion from reviewing your column suggests that DJT is merely playing The Apprentice under the guise of POTUS.<br/><br/>if only a simple,<br/>"You're Fired",<br/>could rid the nation of this ongoing soap-opera-ish nightmare.<br/><br/>sigh
As usual, Charles Blow is right. #45 has a petulant manner and a way of speaking that puts him at the toddler stage, just where he was left as he developed his malignant narcissism. But there is one point I would like to make: I do believe this man is the most poorly spoken of all our presidents, including GW Bush. What is most difficult for me is that he follows one of our most eloquent.
Degradation of language... logic, truthfulness, government, ethics, everything he touches!  <br/><br/>A Midas-in-reverse!
Its hard to figure out whether it is due to  "Have Twitter, kill language" or "Poor skills and thus Twitter". Maybe it is more systemic as in "with this man it does not matter.  He degrades everything"
Listening to a few of our so-called president's comments at his rally on Saturday, I was struck with how tired and trite he was sounding.  The passion wasn't there as it has been in the past even with those few words he repeats over and over.  We can only hope just like those annoying tv commercials for the local mattress store, the fringe of his base will start being irritated and tune him out. (His base will always love him.)
Everyday there is another statement or comment of nonsense from Trump! When Trump opens his mouth to speak, the English language runs for cover and hides!
Truly, Reagan's anti-intellectualism, which equated a lack of education with righteous patriotism - a political ploy cynically designed to make it easier to control the masses, in my opinion - has come home to roost.<br/><br/>We don't just have a President who's pretending to be stupid, here. We've got the real thing.
Amen!
Language is powerful. The way it is being used in the WH is very scary. Historically, one can see demagogues and dictators use similar language strategies that Trump uses. "We the People" must listen closely and make sure that we are checking this attempt to undermine the truth and our democracy.
Blow makes a lot of great points, but they are undercut by his steadfast refusal to use the title President, as in President Trump.  It's just so petty that it undermines his otherwise interesting arguments.
It has been long observed "The decay of language is the decay of man." <br/><br/>And here we are, in a culture that regards education and intellectual discernment (rationality) as mere elitist playthings. Swampman will take us into unimaginable sewers of the mind. It's as if the Enlightenment was merely humanity's adolescent phase. 
And I used to think Hemingway was a great writer.  All those short choppy sentences.  Those simple words.  Real manly stuff.  Now I realize he was just a popular dummy just like Trump
Thank you, Charles, thenk you very much.
The pathological liar's IQ is probably around 10. His vocabulary is limited to few words. He cannot answer a single question from reporters which makes sense. His brain is immature and for the same he behaves like a child bully. What happened to our great nation- we deserve much better!
Whenever he prefaces a "Believe me" to a sentence or ends one with it, never believe him.  When he says, "My good friend," he means guy he shook hands with on a reception line.
Trump's severely limited use of language and his appalling actions are to be expected. He is a bully with a set of mental tools dulled by progressive dementia and, absent medical intervention, will only get worse for himself and for our country.
Seriously? You're complaining about the language while this man dismantles our Democracy, attacks our Social Programs, stuffs his own pockets and those of his thieving friends with taxpayers' hard-earned money, and rattles a nuclear saber? There are times when we Lefties deserve the disdain of the Right and this is one of them. Our President needs to be removed with all possible speed. We the People are doing our best in the streets and on the phone with our Representatives. We need YOU, the Press, to ride your elevator down to ground level, put your delicate sensibilities to one side, and DIG until you find the truth. Several of your reporters are doing fine jobs already -- please assign the rest to work at their direction until this national nightmare is over. 
Trump can't complete a sentence.  Obama was eloquent.<br/><br/>But Trump speaks simply.  He said "if North Korea tests a nuke, I won't be happy."  The meaning of this was clear to most common sense people, and virtually all of Trump supporters, all of whom pretty well "get him".  The hapless reporter asked "What do you mean, you won't be happy?" Trump said "I won't be happy" and looked at the reporter as if the reporter's IQ was 10.  Trump made his point  the most succinct way he could.  To say "I'll do this I'll do that" leads to stupid red lines.  To say "I won't be happy” leaves all options on the table, and is a very effective way to issue a threat.  Maybe not presidential, but effective.  What might I do?  Make a false move and you will find out.  That’s how the other side thinks!<br/><br/>I read Obama's books, excellent. The man is a gifted writer.  He should have stuck to that.  Though his books have lies.  Truthiness.  Imagination.  Not really exact truth.  The way it should have been, not the way it was.<br/><br/>As president, Obama reverted to type. Obama was words. Words, words, words, words.  More words.  Words, words. Carefully crafted, weighty, presidential, eloquent, aspirational.  Soaring.  Impeccable grammar.  Unimpeachable sentiments.  Delivered in a professorial manner, the type used on a failing freshman, a tone and look he no doubt practiced in a mirror.  But, my, my, what rhetoric, what flights of human virtue, who could disagree?  Words.<br/><br/>After that, nothing happened. 
The scariest thing is he didn't used to talk like this. Go and look at old interviews, he was coherent and spoke (for Trump) well. So the million dollar question is what has happened to make his thought process and speech so scattered. The only answer I can come up with is he's exhibiting signs of dimentia. But people around him MUST have known this prior to the election and they allowed him to run anyway. When I think of all that was made of Hilary's health and this mess of a man got thorough without question? I thought something was wrong from the beginning but Hilary's health seemed to take centter stage. No one questioned if Trump was helalthy enough to swerve. This in turn begs the question, why aren't our Presidential candidates required to undergo an unbiased physical? Why don't the American people have the right to know the health of the person who may lead their country? We don't need to know specifics, just whether or not the candidate is healthy enough to run a country. Given the age of both candidates there was bound to be health issues. We have a right to know if our candidate or President is suffering a mental decline. 
You've cracked the proverbial code here, Charles Blow. Trump's "straight talk" and simpleton's use of language was the main thing that appealed - emotionally - to the millions who voted for him. The challenge now is two-fold: to show Trump supporters - somehow - that his "straight talk" was not genuine talk, but rather littered with lies, and that they have been duped. I have to believe that Trump himself will trip up eventually and many of his supporters will see him for what he is: a compulsive liar, one with a poor command of language. The other challenge may be a bit harder: expanding Americans' attention spans, weening them off of social media and dialing down the proliferation of entertaining videos as a form of communication. Surely, folks like Mark Zuckerberg and Jack Dorsey will want to help out on that front, right?
I'm cringing as I write this, but: I MUST disagree with the Carnegie Mellon's analysis finding.  It is not possible that the fraud's vocabulary and usage is better than w.'s.  After all, we''re talking about the man who said:<br/> "Is our children learning?", "They misunderestimated me.", " 'Fool me once, shame on...shame on you. Fool me — you can't get fooled again."<br/>And (Orwell's grave spinning kicks into high gear):<br/>"I just want you to know that, when we talk about war, we're really talking about peace."[<br/>C'mon, Carnegie Mellon, how can you say the fraud's vocabulary is superior?<br/>How about this:  "Too many OB-GYNs aren't able to practice their love with women all across this country."  The fraudster has never uttered "OB-GYN" in his life!<br/>Please reconsider!
Listening to Trump is like watching the White House version of Spinal Tap
Trump's language may seem awkward, or in other words broken into layers. It seems no strange for one he is sending "signals" and "gestures" on a linguistic bite or layer carrier across the media air, submitted to receivers other than the direct audience. Then what he says is not the literal meaning, what direct audience perceive and ridicule. It means something else to someone else, hence an encrypted layered language. He is no fool, but a big puzzle so far hard for norms to understand thus down grades.<br/>BOTTOM LINE: If you consider him a fool, you will not get him.
Actually his verbal skills are right in the middle of most Americans. His followers have the same level .or less. many have said they could not understand Obama-Too much language, too many words. They love trump. He speaks their level of language and they can understand.
One of the most frightening aspects of Trump being president was reading word-for-word the transcripts of his interviews with AP and the Financial Times, uncut and unedited. It reminds me of why I am relieved to be retired now and no longer reading freshman essays in college, although to be fair to the freshmen, they were much more coherent.
All presidents attempt to find the balance between sophisticated, nuanced rhetoric and the argot of the common voter. A few months into his first term, I noticed that Barack Obama was doing this: sentences reduced in length, fewer dependent clauses, droppin' the 'g' at the end of gerundives. Of course, it's true that 19th-century presidents eschewed this baser rhetoric, but that says more about the education of their (and our) constituents than the presidents' eloquence.<br/><br/>That said, Trump takes this to a completely new level. His inability to speak with complex sentence structure results from his unwillingness to read; he probably cannot make it through a sentence without losing the underlying linguistic morphology. I cringe every time he takes the stage with a world leader whose English is not her/his native tongue. It makes one wonder who is the native English speaker. 
What is really frightening is that group of Americans who practice a kind of collective denial; idealizing a man/child whose own ignorance and<br/>Denial puts the entire planet at risk.
He cannot speak and he cannot lead.
A Marcus Aurelius he's not.
Clear speech requires clarity of thought.
You can stop at the word "degradation", and you will have decribed Trump and everything he touches.
I know some smart people who voted for Trump because they have no hope of getting good government from Democrats or Republicans. Sad.  
Watching TV, particularly CNN, for hours on end, can indeed erode one's vocabulary, language skills, even written ones, and severely damage one's communication skills. There are many top notch journalists with impressive communication skills on CNN, but enough dominant ones that have obvious significant trouble stringing words into sentences that reflect meaningful thoughts, that result in intelligent discourse, at least on the surface, with their speech consisting of monotonous, monotonic, run-on sentences, plagued with clipped words, frequent stammering, and unnecessarily repated words and "you knows," "I means," or extreme strange and distracting inflections of voice, with an ocassional complaint about not being able to "wrap that around my head". Their lack of vocabulary is astonishing. The English heard from foreigners at home in the USA and in far-away lands, even from farm hands whose mother tongue is not English, is far superior, certainly to what can be heard from the majority of people on American TV.
The only thing shocking in this article is that some believe George Bush's use of the English language to be worse than that of trump.<br/>The issue here is not just his incredibly poor use of English.  When you call out his "employment of reduced rhetoric" you imply that he is dumbing down on purpose.  What we are actually witnessing are the illogical ramblings of a disturbed mind.<br/>Trump cannot hold a coherent train of thought.  It is obvious that there is some sort of underlying mental pathology that is impairing his ability to communicate.  The issue is not poor grammar.  The issue is mental degeneration. 
This past weekend Trump said in a radio that he had visisted the grave of President Andrew Jackson's wife while he had been in Tennessee. That's just one of the entirely untrue statements he made about Jackson and the Civil War. Incidentally, a portrait of Andrew Jackson is on the wall in the Oval Office. 
1984 Newspeak finally arrives in 2017!
A guy that does some work around my house from time to time is a typical Trump supporter. He is white, 45 years old, no college, divorced twice with two kids and works in law enforcement. He will not read Mr. Blow's excellent opinion because he has never read a newspaper and doesn't watch mainstream news. I asked him what he thought of Trump's first 100 days and he said: "I ain't seen nuthin' bad about him so I think he's doin' a great job. I heard that be brought on the guy who invented the wrestling on TV." 
You are right...language matters...words matter. Will our country survive this assault? I don't know.  
Trump's mangling of the language and the facts are what got him elected. They are what will keep him in office for eight years unless the Democrats can find someone able to deliver their message in third grade level, bite-sized, TV ready chunks. <br/><br/>Reagan was a master of this. W as well. Nixon was the last Republican President with an adult vocabulary, and look where he ended up. <br/><br/>It's time accept that political discourse has passed the tipping point--we've capsized. Falsehoods are facts, bad is good, stupid is smart, and wrong is right.
How's this for totally inarticulate ignorance? “People don’t realize, you know, the Civil War, if you think about it, why?”
If only someone in the media or Congress or some other position of influence and visibility had the guts to say, simply and directly, "Mr. President, you are talking nonsense."  As long as we pretend that he is a rational, intelligent man speaking coherently on subjects of great importance instead of an inarticulate babbler of lies and delusional perceptions, we have no hope of stopping this one-man train wreck.  Reading the transcripts of his remarks is agonizing.  If his life depended upon it, he couldn't construct a sentence containing a subject and a predicate (he wouldn't know a predicate if it bit him).  His rambling meanderings are dizzying, if not soporific.  His grammar is nonexistent, his vocabulary less than third-grade level, and his "logic" neanderthal.  Even his preferred method of communication, Twitter, displays his ignorance of the English language with every misspelled word, incorrect capitalization, and overuse of exclamation points.  The Trump presidential library should be very inexpensive, despite its gold doorknobs.  It will contain one book (which he didn't write) and thousands of unintelligible tweets.
If anyone reads the transcripts of any of Trumps recent interviews, with his incomplete sentences, disjointed thoughts and ideas in his responses and regularly going off topic, along with his apparent ADHD,  one can clearly surmise that these are the thought processes and language of a young child.  There is no alternate diagnosis one could give to this man's mental capacity(or lack of it).
If only his language skills were his most grievous sin! The country and world would easily survive that in contrast to the other damage he has done and will do. I would love to see the files on his transfer from Fordham to Penn. What were his grades? What did his profs and advisers write about him? How much of his acceptance was paved by gold?
It isn't only Donald Trump that is disconnected from objective fact.  He, by virtue of his office, has dragged the entire national discourse into the gutter, and severed the vital connection of declarative language to empirical evidence.  He slashes through events, leaving journalists paralyzed in his wake.  <br/><br/>There is never a chance of holding him accountable for his lies - by the time the facts on one disaster are checked, he has started three more fires in as many different places.<br/><br/>Charles Blow is the one analyst able to keep his head, as those around him throw in the towel on holding Mr. Trump to the same standards as the rest of us.
After watching tonight's evening news (i.e., real not fake news) I think the man is ill-suited for his current job. His pronouncements about Andrew Jackson's thoughts about the Civil War were a bit off base. His hubris and pompous delivery would find him better suited to the classroom as a history teacher. Just when you think you've heard it all he continues to dazzle with yet more Trump takes on reality. And for those admirers  of  President Jackson it should be noted he too was a racist and bigot.
It's kind of elitist to expect him to use high falutin words when he is president of all the people not just the college educated. <br/><br/>The President has to communicate with all of the people, including those whose first language is not English, and it actually takes more skill to use simple words than complicated jargon.  <br/><br/>Complicated jargon is often used often by those who want to convince others that they are not smart enough to understand the issues.  
The economic subjugation of the American worker has brought about the tribalism that demands the following of the chief without question.  When more than 50% of public school children qualify for lunch assistance and a significant number of Walmart workers skip lunch, the will to reason is suspended.  Quite simply, the destruction of the Middle Class directly leads to the destruction of our Democracy and our Economy.
Trump reminds me in many respects of the character Larry "Lonesome" Rhodes, the protagonist of the 1957 movie "A Face in the Crowd", directed by Elia Kazan and starring Andy Griffith, Patricia Neal and Walter Matthau.  Trump is today's form of the plain-speaking, great-appetites man of the people portrayed in the "Lonesome" Rhodes' character (depicted in a mesmerizing performance by Griffith), although Rhodes hailed from Arkansas, was musical, had a bit of an evangelical preacher in him, and was more charming than Trump while at the same time glib (sound familiar), whereas Trump gives us the Queens' version in the updated play. Unlike Rhodes, who saw people only as marks, Trump, I think, actually likes people in general.  But in much the the same way they are the same character.  Rhodes was brought down when mocking statements he was making about the credulity of the people, while wearing a live microphone when he was supposed to be off air, were aired live by the character played by Patricia Neal, who came to see just how dangerous he really was and how big he was capable of getting.  Somehow, I don't see Trump making that same mistake about his base.  He actually loves his base, even if he doesn't know how to serve them.  I don't know what it will take to knock Trump off the pedestal his fans have put him on--I really don't.  
There is such a thing as a fresh and limber mind that can come through without an elaborate vocabulary or command of basic grammar.  Deeply felt matters of the heart, kindliness, useful insight, fairness and respect can be stated simply within limited language skills and a genuine intent will still emerge.  It's just that we are not lead by a fresh or limber mind these days.<br/><br/>The daily mangling of language is painful to hear, but it is the message within  that is alarming.  Somehow, we can wade through the gobbledygook and eke out the message filtered through invented words, repeated favored phrases inside sentences that never land securely in a completed thought.  <br/><br/>But, the trend to change to an opposite view that is quickly acted upon, can make most feel that we are listening to someone who does not believe what he says.  Or that his mind is stuck in some scratchy and pointless groves.<br/><br/>Ingrained in this is much evidence of a moral deficit.<br/><br/>The tragedy is that a lack of language skills, and all the rest is taken as a signature of honesty.   The deeper tragedy is that eloquence and well considered speech is seen to belong only to the elite who have acquired them.  Such skills are the holdings of the educated liberal who can be seen as condescending and exclusionary, when in fact, all have a right to them and can be enriched and freed by them, no matter which view is expressed through their gain.  <br/><br/>Otherwise, we all will be forced to forever sort through gibberish.
'... presidential candidates in general use “words and grammar typical of students in grades 6-8, though Donald Trump tends to lag behind the others”.'<br/>Vocabulary and grammar are not the only two attributes of the language that the speech of many of the Presidents leaves much to be desired. The pronunciation and regional-demographic accent is another. Since the 1950s, only two or three elected Presidents spoke without a regional accent: General Eisenhower and film-actor Reagan. The speech of John Kennedy, Clinton, George W. Bush, and Obama is a proof of the failure of famous universities to cure their students of the regional accent. Although Trump does not speak  -- in my humble view -- ear-grating Newyorkese, his speech is a disgrace to the Office of the President. 
Trump's speech does, in fact, make him sound like man who is only capable of articulating errant thoughts by means of disjointed sentence fragments and simply repeating or parroting himself or others.  Nevertheless, most Americans can at least understand - or get the gist of - what he is trying to convey.  For most people, however, the real challenge is in reading what he has said, such as transcripts of interviews or speeches.  These written accounts that directly quote Trump are often littered with hyphens, commas, and ellipses that attempt to quote him verbatim.  This is an almost impossible task and I, myself must read these several times, trying to actually hear him saying them, in order to best understand what he is saying.  Its not just the hyperbole or lack of vocabulary that makes it difficult to read what he has said, but the fact that he can't say it without restarting, halting, and on-the-fly self-corrections mid-sentence.  Imagine what a YUGE difficulty it must be for non-native English speakers to read these.
I believe a candidate running for the US presidency should be specified that it is mandatory not only to show his or her tax returns - but to show at least one University graduate degree in order to make sure the person has qualifications to run a country of 50 states including roughly 360 millions people. This person should have also knowledge of the 3-level of the government- as well as knowledge of the US constitution and so on. Lest the elected president without any competence is manipulated by people, around him and in the administration, who would take advantage of the elected president weaknesses to push their own agendas by coercing the elected president by his lack of perception of the reality on all levels (in this case Trump). Very dangerous!
His most grievous sins are defrauding the American people, and ignoring the dangers of climate change. After that comes language.
NPR interviewed some one who said that translators such those at the UN who are used to translating the speech of diplomats struggle with the Donald's statements because they are not classical diplomatic speeches. His statements  are incomplete; use slang, make references to things that only a native NYC-er would understand and are just not classic "speeches."  
I agree with this opinion.  However, we would not be in this position if more people had voted.   It’s pretty discouraging and sad when only about half of the people care enough to vote.  In certain way, we got what we deserve.  Fortunately, there is a cure for the cancer in the White House --- make people care enough to vote.    We must find a way to have greater voter participation.  
The man's entire public existence is one continuous, self-aggrandizing stream of falsehoods.     We can only hope that his election was a unique, one-shot phenomenon. A fluke of personality, combined with circumstances that is highly unlikely to ever repeat itself. The success of other phenomena such as Fox News does still give one pause though.
My husband and I both hold graduate degrees in English.  We've taught University English classes, and began doing so in the late 1980s.  I changed careers in the mid-90s, though I still work in academe.  My husband - who has a PhD from the University of Toronto and did post-doctoral work at Harvard - had to quit.  He couldn't bear it any longer.  He could not get students to read at all - not a short story.  Needless to say, kids who don't read can't write.  The writing I see in university now is appalling; my mother wrote better with her sixth grade education.  It's just too depressing.  
Rhetoricians can analyze Trump's speech habits and find parallels with demagogues and dictators of the past. But I suspect his manner of speaking reflects his limited intellectual capacity and attention span; he does not restrict his vocabulary to such simple word choices and sentence structures as part of a calculated attempt to persuade the listener, but merely speaks the way he is capable of speaking. Has anyone else, maybe in the real-estate development world he operated in, heard him use more sophisticated speech? I would be interested to know. That said, I do believe that part of Trump's appeal to angry, uneducated white voters is their ability to understand him, whereas an Obama may have gone over their heads or at least offended them with his fancy talk.
Worse than simple ignorance, is not being aware of one's ignorance.  Trump appears to believe that what he doesn't know, no one else knows.<br/>"No one knew healthcare reform could be so complicated."<br/>When he learns something that is news to him, he acts as though no one else knew it, and he boasts about his knowledge.<br/>When he learned about Susan B. Anthony's role in Women's Rights, he brought it up as if, since he did not know about her, others did not either. He then spoke about her like he was giving a lesson on the subject, informing others about her success, and his wonderful fund of knowledge.<br/>Many narcissists know a lot, and revel in pointing this out by actually saying things that others do not know. It's a way of saying, "look at me, I'm so smart."<br/>Trump does this repeatedly, but because he knows so little he never says anything that anyone who can recall history from the sixth grade does not know.<br/>The truly pathetic and frightening aspect of this is that he does not realize this.<br/>This is the lack of appreciating one's ignorance.
I was a professor for thirty-six years at a state university in the Southwest. If  Mr. Trump had been in one of my classes, I doubt he would have received  a passing grade on a research paper, which brings me to this question: How in the world did he manage to graduate from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, an Ivy League School? 
It's interesting how so many of Trump's supporters type in ALL CAPS.
Mr. Blow,<br/><br/>You must know that your comments about language, its potential degradation, and those who you presume must be responsible for this degradation, say far more about you than they do about those to whom you refer. <br/><br/>For one, you misunderstand language in its purest form: a medium to convey meaning. That is, to transmit a comprehensible message. The bottom line is that if it can be understood, it is valid. All other features and facts about a language are accessory. <br/><br/>Secondly, you conflate "rhetoric" and "language." <br/><br/>Trump's style of language clearly resonates with a great many people. It has therefore served its communicative purpose. Whatever opinions you hold about it are prescriptive. Shame on you.  <br/><br/>I write this with the authority of two scientific degrees about communication science and its disorders.  
Is it any wonder that Republicans want to cut funding to education. An educated electorate would never vote for this man. 
This begs the question: With his level of vocabulary, how was Trump ever able to obtain a university degree? If this is the quality of their alumni, I would never attend, or send my children to the university he attended. 
"In Trump world, facts don’t matter, truth doesn’t matter, language doesn’t matter. Passionate performance is the only ideal."<br/>=============================================<br/>That says is beautifully, Charles.<br/><br/>"Passionate performance is the only ideal" is the perfect description.
I was taught that rhetoric is the art of persuasion.  This art can be analyzed 'til the cows come home, but the persuasion is really all that matters in the end.  To his (already persuaded) supporters, perhaps no longer all of that 46%, Trump is highly persuasive.  His gibberish is an anti-intellectual rhetorical figure that may not even have a name.  But it works.  The opposition needs its own compelling rhetoric to counter, and I'm not seeing that yet.  Certainly not in an op-ed piece like this one.  Preaching to the choir.
I think Carnegie Mellon needs to check its sampling techniques; W may have butchered some words but, in the end, you could at least understand what he was trying to say. trump is stupifyingly incoherent.
Trump's use of the language consists of saying whatever elicits the responses that he seeks, it's Trump playing on peoples' feelings and affecting their actions by means of their emotions rather than their wits and consideration of the consequences. For a private business owner whose words mean nothing because it's the balance sheets that count, it's nothing but for a President, it's going to bring great grief to Donald, more than he seems to grasp.  He cannot achieve much of anything without the cooperation of not just one or two people with who he might be dealing but entire nations of people whose lives can be seriously affected by what the government of the U.S. does or does not do.  A leader who lies must know what is true and what is not or pretty soon the lies and the truth become so difficult to separate that suddenly what he wants to do will not find purchase -- it will be like trying to move on loose sand.  Trump is the President of the U.S. and world leaders know that no matter what, as long as he does not act as wildly as he talks, they are safe and so they let him act silly with some tolerance, but when they cannot be certain, there will be problems. 
I could forgive Trump for his butchery of the language if his actions were thoughtful, compassionate and coherent.  What makes all of this so disheartening is the lethal combination of ignorance and arrogance.  It is as if he purposefully ignores basic rules of grammar as a way to disrupt or rebuke what he considers to be an elitist obsession.  I have no other explanation.  In fact, I have given up trying to analyze this man.
And I remember when we thought George Dubya Bush had no command of the English language!  Lowering the bar again!
Seems to me like George Orwell had him pegged.
Once the election is over, real presidents don't give rallies.
Trump's ignorance goes beyond his inability to put words together...it's the awful things he says with those words. He has said the Constitution of the United States and its system of checks and balances is archaic and bad for the country. The Constitution, which he swore to protect and defend, is bad for the country in his estimation! He also said in an interview that he wonders why no one has looked into the causes of the Civil War. What? Nobody has studied the Civil War? Every time Trump opens his mouth, he proves he is an uneducated fool.
People just don't listen to words anymore.<br/><br/>Just listen to the inflated punch behind every adjective and adverb in a news cast.  It has to be 'so' this or 'very' that.  News isn't just news, it's 'BREAKING news.'  Or how about getting six politicos to talk over each other at the same time.  Great entertainment, isn't it?  But can anyone make out what is being said?<br/><br/>If people don't hear words, and their meaning, anymore, no wonder that coherent thoughts and nuanced arguments are becoming lost skills.
Every time I catch myself writing 'very', I delete it, and 'very, very' -- never.  <br/><br/>Trump's inability to structure a sentence, or extend his vocabulary beyond elementary one and two syllable words says volumes about his intellect.<br/><br/>Thank you, Charles.
My area of New York is under a tornado warning right now and I'm STILL more afraid of horrible hurricane Trump. 
Truth of the matter, the man is an utter and pathetic simpleton. Any of his extemporaneous interviews or impromptu speeches reveals nothing short of idiotic word salad and self-aggrandizing pronouncements. His patronizing and ingratiating comments are laced with obvious disingenuous and awkward attempts to portray himself as astute, perceptive and concerned. If he were not so boorish, despicable and dangerous he would be worthy of pity but not on my watch.
So I guess now we have Chauncey Gardener as President.
Bravo!
"He gets bored and likes to watch TV..."<br/><br/>Why does this statement scare the absolute living daylights out of me?
At least he can notch the 'very, very', 'tremendous'  'big beautiful' simplifications of language down as an accomplishment of his first 100 days. Give credit where credit is due even if it's 'fake news.'  David
I think he's got dementia setting in.
To say that Our Leader's intellectual capacity has the depth of a coat of paint clearly overstates it. I would compare it to a single slice of Riker's Island baloney on stale "wry".
Its quite enjoyable reading these comments. A NYT columnist bashes Trump and its faithful lemmings approve greatly. So mature and open minded. And you'll get another one tomorrow! Enjoy the echo chamber and a steady dose of this garbage for the next 8 years. I hope it makes you feel better about yourselves
Wow! Charles Milton Blow actually got as far as the fourth paragraph before he started trotting out his "sources." Go outside and find out what's out there.  -Zin out
What did you expect from a Penn grad?
Beautiful. To use a word. This is perhaps his most disheartening quality. It used to make me laugh. It's like listening to fingernails on a chalkboard. 
Once again, thank you Mr. Blow for your lucid illustration of the importance of word power.<br/>Words matter! Grammar matters! Use of language, clearly stated or written with precision matters! It is our way to convey meaning to ideas. It is motivating &amp; inspiring.<br/>The English language, when reduced to incomplete sentences with poor grammar conveys confusion &amp; mottled thinking. It shows a lack of attention in the thought process.<br/>I'm always amazed &amp; impressed when I hear English spoken by people from Great Britain. I hear clarity &amp; precision in the use of language. Americans can &amp; do also speak &amp; write with a command of the English language. However it doesn't always sound razor sharp!<br/>Unfortunately, we've been dulled down through use of colloquial expressions as a substitute for linguistic precision.<br/>A snake oil salesman needs only to convince his audience he's selling a miracle cure for what ails them. So convinced, that public becomes converts to the hope of the message. Skeptical, thoughtful thinking &amp; the willingness to investigate such claims is lost.<br/>This purveyor of unattainable goals, clothed in illusion is extremely dangerous to American Democracy &amp; world order. Instead of Making America Great Again (not even an original slogan), he is drowning America in the Sea of Fantasy. 
"Eats shoots, and leaves." "Eats, shoots, and leaves." Honestly, could Trump tell the difference between one more comma? Our lives would depend on it.
Trump doesn't rely on words he uses emotion and tone to communicate. People relate to the tone of the words and want to believe the words because the tone and emotion resonate and make them feel something they want to be true.  I wish it weren't so. The English language is beautiful and full of subtly but unappreciated by many. I can understand why Blow is so offended. His mastery of written English is 2nd to none.
What?  Trump's grammatical usage is better than Bush's?  Maybe - but his vocabulary is more limited, and his conjuration of nonsense words is bigly higher.
Trump is a very shallow man who seems to be over his head trying to be president. Saying things like he did not know that health care and being president was so hard, is not comforting.  He can handle Fox and Friends or Shawn Hannity but regular press folks?  Not so much!
How he says things, what he says and why he says it has been given too much attention. The time had come to just ignore him. We know he's an idiot, a buffoon and a clown.  The only focus should asking Trump why is he committing Treason. Ask him why is he laundering money for Putin. How much is his cut. Is it enough to make him a real billionaire instead of his made-up story that he is one (he isn't). And is that why he wants Russia take over Eastern Europe again? Call him out for what he is: a Traitor with a price.
This guy talks like a second grade bully. He needs to be constantly embarrassed for his mendacity and ignorance as Dickerson did today.   He obviously doesn't respect the Office of the President ; the media should not defer to this proud ignoramus. 
How about him saying "I don't stand by anything" when asked about his bizarre inflammatory accusations against Barack Obama "tapping his wires" and being "sick" and "bad?"<br/>The calm, well prepared journalist John Dickerson got under Trump's skin.<br/>And Trump resorted to a quick --and-- angered exit.<br/>Once again words failed this president, who apparently doesn't stand by anything. Trump could not defend his case, and it is clear he has neither a legal background nor debate skills. Walking away from the interview was not impressive. Clearly a defensive president unable to make his case.<br/>Next up, why the heck is he praising ruthless authoritarian killer dictators? 
Trump-speak, like everything else he does, is a function (or non-function) of an a narcissist. His speech before the joint session of Congress was the "best speech ever given;" his inaugural crowd was the "largest ever to witness" an inauguration; he won the largest electoral college victory in modern history; his first hundred days were the most successful of any president; his cabinet is the smartest and most talented ever assembled. Trump's narcissism informs his life; he is ignorant, lazy, and childish, but in his mind, no one is as great or as smart. He has no idea how a bill becomes a law and actually believes his executive orders carry the weight of law; he would like to change the "archaic" rules of Congress and dissolve the 9th Circuit. His speaking pattern is the least of our concerns: this man is unfit for the presidency and, if the democrats successfully take over the House and Senate, should be removed from office.
Mr. Trump should be told to his face by anyone who meets with him that his degradation of the English language and of the truth are grievous sins that will not be forgotten.  The media should broadcast this truth to the world 24/7; only in this manner can you break down the wall of falsehoods that he is attempting to create.  The media should unceasingly explain to Mr. Trump that democracies necessarily rest on transparency and truth; it should explain to Mr. Trump that if someone lies to you often, or frequently misleads you, or repeatedly says something important without providing any evidence or explanation, after a while you loose trust in that person's word, and democracy is diminished.    
Obama and Clinton (both Clintons, actually) spoke in complete and coherent sentences. I miss those days.
Americans are becoming lazier in terms of critical thinking and looking for easy answers in flash in the pan con men. Action and effort used to matter more than hot air and flapping lips. As long as American society in the big picture disdains education and learning as a liberal conspiracy, we will continue to see idiocy in our leaders. 
What a tragedy that America was conned by a man who speaks like seventh grader, does not read books and is addicted to television! <br/><br/>I look forward to his ind indictments on colluding with Russia and his resignation!
You are what you tweet.
Unfortunately, Trump's words work! He gets through to millions. By contrast Obama put people to sleep. Very little of what he said penetrated.<br/><br/>RL Stevenson:  "Man is a creature who lives not on bread alone, but primarily by catchwords." Trump knows this and that is why he won the election...<br/>========================================================<br/>There must be a way for Democrats to find SIMPLE words to resonate.
The language of this president is commensurate and directly proportional to the IQ of his voters .
Robert browning is said to have a vocabulary of 30,000 words, Shakespeare 28,000. Counting all the words in the tweets from donald trump i could find only 928. Sad
A curious fact that has emerged from experiments in social psychology:  You take subjects and lie to them.  Shortly after, you debrief them, tell them it was a lie, and lay out your refutation.<br/><br/>And later, if you ask them about the study, they remember (and believe) the lie, while forgetting about the refutation.  <br/><br/>The general problem is that if you tell enough lies and string them together with still more lies and without any refutation at all -- as the right wing media tends to do -- what you may wind up with is a religious cult to whom the facts and refutations mean nothing at all, even if group members happen to come in contact with he real facts.  
It's not just Trump. It's not just Repubs. It's that, for years now, everyone has stopped talking about issues. We just talk polls. The horse race is what we are too focused on. If someone told Trump supporters - in simple language -- the negative impact ON THEM  of their hero's "To Do List," then maybe things will start changing. It's not complicated. Oh, wait, ratings will fall? Gee, maybe it is too complicated.<br/>Nevermind........
This insults paint!
Trump's ascendency spells the beginning of America's slide from a democracy to an idiocracy.  It is alarming to those of us who care about our country, our developing youth, and our world, and it will be useful only if it is instructional to those whose instincts allowed them to see him as a "leader", someone who cared about the middle class and who would put blue collar workers back to work.  He is none of those things, and his ignorance and tough guy attitude is likely to lead us into combat in Korea and elsewhere, war(s) that will be fought by the children of those who saw him as a savior.  
We to correlate a language carrier with the identity of the sender and receiver. The kind of language described is the one preferred for populists to win first of all, as it is targeting the lower class, where the majority of votes are. Populist candidates, all of them, are speaking the language of their targetted voters, not the educated, cultured or thinkers, nothing on idealogy or principles are carried out and embedied in such language. Rhetorics are articulate accordingly.<br/>On the other hand, if a populist language is destructive from a linguistic point of view, degraded is about same, it is coherent with Populism theses, being destructive after winning.
Trumpspeak the updated verson of  Newspeak necessitates the obliteration of Doublethink, the ability to hold several conflicting opinions at he same time and not being duscovered in the attempt of the autocrat in chief to reducing our vocabilary to express dangerous ideas to mere dozens words.  The object is that if you have fewer or no words you have difficulty in formulating complex thoughts and rebellious ideas to others.  <br/><br/>You might be surprised when you consider  how few words you need in a perfected Trumpocracy: Halt, hands up, face the wall, speak when we tell you, work faster, get in line, chear when our leader speaks or appears, eat what you are given, no talking when working, no talking in line, our leaders are always right so report all traitors. All people not a member of the party are suspect and may be traitors.  <br/><br/>In the world of the blind the one eyed man is king and a man like Trump is a great and inspirational leader who never lies, its amazing, he’s the always right and is your voice,  take his word for it.    
We've been on this decent into the gutter language of disrespecting both educated people and facts since the 1980s.  A shining ditty upon the swill of dumb-speak was Reagan's most often uttered, "You ain't seen nuttin' yet!", as  he smirked with joy to the audience's applause.  
Who are you?, Bill Safire.
Enough already, Mr. Blow.  Any man who searches for the right word while speaking, or who uses compound sentences or 'five dollar'  words, or just goes on ... a bit to long, is going to be called a  bloviator. He will be accused of 'being in love with the sound of his own voice'.  Dullards will advise him to be clear and 'concise', the current buzz-word  that separates the alpha speakers from the pathetic hand wringers.  And of course, if he is engaging  women in conversation he will demeaned as 'a mansplainer'. <br/><br/>Let me mansplain something to you Mr. Blow  - Trump, and his butchering of the language,  has been a long time coming... but his arrival was inevitable. <br/><br/>And there is no one to blame but ourselves. 
Mr. Blow: you give articulate voice to how I feel about this awful man in this awful moment. I am not clear our sense of participatory democracy will survive him. It is my intensely held hope that we wil have a moment that allows to rethink what it means to live in this country and help one another. Your thoughts and ability to put into words what so many of us are feeling will be need should some grace from the Almighty provide us a chance to rethink who we are.
Great piece, Charles! But Donald is increasingly losing touch with reality, (actually, he's probably long gone already) not just butchering language and degrading the country and the presidency. My only fear is that his lunacy is contagious and he's spreading it to the GOP and the rest of his misguided supporters. I can't help wondering if this was what Caligula was like...
A jumble of incomplete thoughts stitched together with arrogance and ignorance...<br/><br/>Mr. Blow, that's one of the best and most concise descriptions of the Trump presidency that I have ever read.
Since humans are (individually and collectively) a work-in-progress, to achieve any level of quality they need some kind of reinforcement, first in the course of their parenting and schooling, then from their "reference group". Trump and his followers are severely impaired in that respect and their coddling together is basically a desperate cry for attention. Blind resentment aimed at whoever does not suffer from their crippling dysfunction is another name for "populism". Duterte called Obama "a son of a whore" - invite him to the White House. Obama is black and smart - keep insulting him and destroy his legacy. What we are witnessing is the Revenge of the Imbeciles, not the alleged cry for justice from the downtrodden. Shouting nonsense (or worse, acting nonsense) is the last resort of a severely damaged segment of the population. Today's garbled language of tweets and online forums provides a potent reinforcing environment fro the the drowning of language.        
What I still do not understand is why he continues to appeal to so many. Leave education, eruditeness, achievement, and well-crafted speech out of the equation. The guy sounds like a complete bumbling moron when he speaks. He does not tolerate rejection or probing questions well. He is ill-equipped for the stress of the four years ahead of him; who knew it was so hard? He has not done for his followers what he promised, has learned that the courts and Congress are not just departments in his real estate office, to do what he says to do, so what is it about him they find attractive?<br/><br/>Inquiring minds want to know!
Charles Blow, it's 100 days and you are running out of material already? He talks like fool. That is not a story after all this time.
Hey, Charles, you gotta give him credit. He still performs one grade level above the Kremlin twitter bots: <br/><br/>"Hilry was start world war III and you vote for because no care for Veterans" (yes, this was an actual twitter reply).
"a man who is simultaneously unintelligible in his delivery, self-assured in his ignorance and consciously bathing in his narcissism."<br/><br/>Uniquely unqualified to be President of the United States.<br/><br/>(unintelligible).
Actually l like the word "BIGLY'.<br/>As for what he says and how he says it ....<br/>As for his consistency and depth of thought ...<br/>As for his command of issues and the attention span to gain same...<br/>As for his predilection for bombastic self aggrandizement ...<br/>And as for veracity ...
Idiocracy 
"...his grammatical usage was only better than one president: George W. Bush."<br/>Mr. Blow,<br/>I trust you mean "...grammatical usage was better than only one..."
As much as I agree with the sentiment, this article is just another example of why Mr Trump won. It feels good to feel smug, but it ignores the massive dropout rates in high school, the fact that 60% of undergraduate STEM students either drop out or change degrees, that over 42% of the labor force with a PhD is foreign born (this excludes foreign born permanent residents and naturalized citizens), this is over 52% for computer science. Only 39% of employers believe that college graduates are adequately trained for employment. All of these statistics as well as the election of the tweeter in Chief pretty much point to an educational system that is failing American students. American higher education does not appear to be serving Americans very well (apart from separating them from their money!). It would be far better for Mr Blow and the Democratic party to address these issues. Being smug doesn't pay off the college debt or create jobs.
All these angst ridden, emotional worries by progressives about the nature of Trump's language......sad. I mean the progressives, not Trump.
In 1783 Militia only meant the professional Armed forces of a nation and arms only meant weapons of war.<br/>In 2017 militia is  GOP Newspeak our for our base and arms mean whatever the National Rifle Association says it means.
I certainly agree with the analysis of Trump's speech. We are  at this time in history so far removed from the last great war that there are citizens who don't remember. Or the individuals who voted for this man must be so disconnected from their past that they don't remember how the German people were duped, and what consequences befell the world as a result.  Ignorance, lack of clear thinking and cognitive dissonance are partly why people are drawn to Trump. But lack of historical perspective surely plays a major role in this nightmare.
I consider myself an independent politically, as I would rather not marry myself to a party that may count on my loyalty when they deviate from doing what I think is right - I want them to earn my vote with every decision.<br/><br/>However, this article hits on the head one of the main reasons I am considered a progressive or liberal over a conservative by friends and family - I appreciate smart, well-spoken people who speak in complete sentences.<br/><br/>Other commenters have rightly pointed out that pretty much all conservative outlets cater to simple, emotional language over nuanced, fact based language. <br/><br/>The problem is that Americans will consume the former over the latter in the same way we consume non-nutritious fast-food over a well-prepared, nutritious meal. 
I am an editor and writing tutor with a PhD, MA, and Certificate in Editing from the University of Chicago. My BA is from the University of California, Berkley--where I had the great fortune to study the philosophy of language. I have been doing editing for a number of decades and since 2006 have run an Internet mailing list devoted to language and editing (and now journalism). I don't have any problem with the way the president speaks. But I don't harbour any personal hostility toward him. I voted for Obama and I voted for Trump. I find him a refreshing change.
Trump rarely uses proper nouns.  He doesn't know enough about the topic at hand to use proper nouns.  Look at any issue or legislation - he never knows enough to say something intelligent about them.  He believes there are things in the health care bill that are not there.  Who does he trust to tell him the truth, and does he have the capacity to bring his thinking in line with facts?  Not hopeful.
In the early times of terrorism in Egypt, land of (anti-Muslim) Brotherhood terrorist organization, in a Police raid they arrested an Amir (literally prince, leader) of a terrorist group having a TV set equipped with an antenna that is not available on market, neither TV foreign channels that time could be accessed using the dominant market technology, but this kind of antenna can.<br/>It was astonishing and stunning to reporters, watchers and terrorism thinkers, because terrorist groups ban any kind of media, specially TV and newspapers, a ground for brainwashing. The inferences are numerous and crucial. First, only head personnel communicate with the outsider world. Second, all what is known at base is totally different at top, most of it are opposites. Third, the deceive techniques is at the upper priority for their security. Fourth, TV is the communication tool least vulnerable to monitoring, catching up and pinning on, compared to telephone, cyber, or newspapers.<br/><br/>TV is the way leaders of terrorists trigger a terrorist attack, in addition to regular communication. Trump in his interview with WP during his campaign triggered Brussels airport attack. Have a look into his words and connect the dots.<br/>That is the importance of TV for a businessman, now president of the superpower, when governing in the normal ethics and rules, overburdened sometimes, he has no time for the described addiction of TV watching. A TERRORIST.
Yes, "degradation of the language is one of Trump's most grevious sins."  Perhaps, more Importantly, his reckless disregard for the truth represents a clear and present danger to the United States and the world.  Essentially, his words, however inarticulate, mean absolutely nothing.  He cannot be trusted, a fatal flaw for anyone, but especially so for the president of the most powerful country on the planet.
How great you write these articles. Where exactly were you during the Democratic Party primaries? Oh yes, you were using your column to write love letters to Hillary...
I'm not completely convinced Trump's poor grasp of language is entirely without guile. Your column is spot on, but I see that his speech shores up his support and creates the divide among us that he needs. Over here, we are the intellectuals who read (in his world it doesn't take much to be cast as an intellectual). We are the enemy. Do you have an opinion on how this divide might be crossed? As long as he keeps us in two camps with his language, we won't be able to defeat him and his agenda.